10092130	Analysis of PTEN mutations and deletions in B-cell non-Hodgkin's lymphomas.	"The PTEN gene is involved in 10q23 deletions in several types of cancer, including glioma, melanoma, endometrial and prostate carcinomas. The PTEN gene product is a dual-specificity phosphatase with putative tumor suppressor function. Deletions and rearrangements of 10q22-25 have been reported in approximately 5%-10% of non-Hodgkin's lymphomas (NHLs), raising the possibility of PTEN involvement in these tumors. In order to address this question, we analyzed a panel of NHLs (n = 74) representative of the main histologic subtypes for mutations and homozygous deletions of PTEN. We report somatic coding/splice site mutations in 20% (2 of 10) of Burkitt's lymphoma cell lines and in 3% (2 of 64) of primary NHL cases analyzed. No homozygous deletions were found in these tumors. Interestingly, this study showed that cytogenetically characterized NHL cases (n = 6) with 10q22-q25 abnormalities displayed neither biallelic deletions nor mutations of PTEN. These results suggest that a tumor suppressor gene distinct from PTEN may be involved in 10q deletions in this subgroup of NHL cases."
10188722	Genetic pattern of prostate cancer progression.	"Genetic alterations in primary prostate cancer (CaP) have been extensively studied, yet little is known about the genetic mechanisms underlying progression of primary CaP to metastatic prostate cancer. As a result, it is not possible to distinguish clinically indolent localized disease from potentially life-threatening tumors with high metastatic potential. To address this question, we collected tissue from 34 autopsy-derived metastases, samples rarely analyzed in previous studies. These were compared to a separate set of 17 prostatectomy specimens containing 22 foci of CaP associated with 49 examples of high-grade prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia (PIN), a histological precursor of CaP. We compared the loss of heterozygosity (LOH) profiles of high-grade PIN, primary CaP and metastases by analyzing 33 microsatellite markers previously found to have high frequencies of LOH in primary CaP. These markers were on chromosomes 5q, 6q, 7q, 8p, 9p, 10q, 11p, 13q, 16q, 17, 18q and 21q. In addition, markers on chromosomes 4p, 11q, 14q and 20q with no reported LOH in primary CaP were analyzed to determine the frequency of background LOH. In PIN lesions, the rate of LOH was significant only at D5S806 (20%) and D16S422 (29%). In addition, different PIN lesions within the same prostate gland were genetically diverse, indicating divergent evolution of synchronous neoplastic precursor lesions. LOH frequency was progressively higher in primary CaP and metastatic lesions. In primary CaP, significant losses occurred at the 8p, 10q, 11p, 16q, 17p, 18q and 21q loci (range 17-43%). Distinct patterns of LOH frequencies were observed in primary CaP compared with metastases. Although some loci (D16S422, D17S960, D21S156) showed similar frequencies of LOH in primary CaP and metastatic CaP, most other loci showed up to 7-fold metastasis-related increases. The metastatic samples revealed previously unrecognized prostate cancer LOH at D5S806, D6S262, D9S157, D13S133 and D13S227. These significant stage-specific differences in LOH frequency specify genetic loci that may play key roles in CaP progression and could represent clinically useful biomarkers for CaP aggressiveness."
10188912	The promoter and the enhancer region of the KLK 3 (prostate specific antigen) gene is frequently mutated in breast tumours and in breast carcinoma cell lines.	"KLK3 or prostate specific antigen (PSA) is a serine protease, which is an established tumour marker of prostatic adenocarcinoma. PSA is now used widely for the diagnosis and monitoring of patients with prostate cancer. Recent studies have demonstrated that about 70% of breast cancers produce PSA. In this study, we examined the molecular mechanism underlying the expression of the PSA gene in breast cancer and breast cancer cell lines. We analysed nine breast tumours categorized on the basis of high- or low-PSA expression in tumour cytosols and four breast cancer cell lines. To determine abnormalities associated with PSA expression in breast tumours, genomic DNA was extracted and all five exons of the PSA gene were polymerase chain reaction (PCR) amplified and sequenced on both strands. PCR amplification was also performed for the promoter and enhancer elements of the PSA gene. No mutations were observed in the coding portion of the gene. A polymorphism was observed in exon 2 from three breast tumours. However, sequencing of the promoter and the enhancer elements of the PSA gene reveals several point mutations. Within a 5.8-kb promoter/enhancer region of the PSA gene, we detected 16 different mutational hotspots (appearing more than once in the nine tumours). Among these hotspots, two appeared in seven out of nine tumours. Most importantly, the androgen response element (ARE I) in the proximal promoter was found mutated in four tumours and in the breast carcinoma cell line MCF-7. Mutations associated with the ARE I have been shown previously to result in an 80% decrease in PSA gene expression. The mutations in the core enhancer and promoter region probably contribute to the aberrant expression of the PSA gene in breast tumours, possibly by altering the regulation of the gene by steroid hormones."
10220791	p53 gene alterations in prostate cancer after radiation failure and their association with clinical outcome: a molecular and immunohistochemical analysis.	"This study evaluates the prevalence of p53 gene mutations in prostate cancer in salvage prostatectomies after radiation failure using single strand conformational polymorphism (SSCP) and direct sequencing of the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) product. Findings were correlated with immunohistochemically (IHC) detectable p53 expression in residual prostate cancer. The usefulness of p53 as a marker of clinical outcome was evaluated. Thirty-three cases were available for molecular and immunohistochemical analysis. Immunohistochemical stains for p53 were performed with clone DO7. PCR-SSCP for mutations in the coding region of p53 DNA (exons 4-9) was performed on all immunopositive cases and 12 of 23 immunonegative cases. All samples with an SSCP shift were sequenced for the respective exon. Patients were evaluated for biochemical failure for 1-82 months (median 38 months) following surgery. Immunohistochemical p53 reactivity was noted in 10 of 33 (30%) patients. Among p53 immunopositive cases SSCP shifts were seen in 7 of 10 (70%) samples with 5 of the 7 (71%) showing p53 mutations. Univariate analysis revealed abnormal expression of p53 protein by immunohistochemistry to be a significant predictor of poorer outcome (p = 0.025, log rank), however this was not independent of pathologic stage, surgical margin status and Gleason score. The presence of p53 gene mutations by PCR-SSCP and direct sequencing did not predict for outcome. In our study 30% of prostate cancers at the time of salvage prostatectomy after radiation failure expressed immunohistochemically detectable p53. PCR-SSCP and sequencing shows that not all of these cases have detectable mutations in the most frequent mutation sites (exons 4-9). Clinical failure is more common in the group of prostate cancer patients with abnormal p53 immunoreactivity."
10230676	Molecular genetics of prostate cancer.	"Despite the substantial clinical importance of prostate cancer, the molecular mechanisms underlying the development and progression of the disease are poorly understood. The aim of molecular genetics is to reveal the genetic alterations and genes that are involved in disease processes. Linkage analysis have already implicated four chromosomal loci that may harbour prostate cancer susceptibility genes. In addition, chromosomal alterations in prostate tumors have been studied using several techniques, such as comparative genomic hybridization. These analyses have indicated that losses of chromosomes 6q, 8p, 10q, 13q, and 16q, as well as gains of 7, 8q, and Xq are particularly common in prostate cancer. There is also a strong evidence, that genes, such as androgen receptor gene (AR), e-cadherin, and PTEN, are involved in the development and progression of prostate cancer. However, the target genes for most of the above mentioned chromosomal alterations as well as the genes predisposing to prostate cancer have not been cloned yet. The identification of those genes should be the utmost goal of basic research of prostate cancer, today."
10325488	Molecular biology of progression of prostate cancer.	"Despite the clinical importance of prostate cancer, the molecular mechanisms underlying the development and progression of prostate cancer are poorly understood. The lack of knowledge on the mechanisms has probably been one of the most important reasons why no new treatment modalities have been developed to cure the disease. Recent studies, especially those performed by comparative genomic hybridization, have revealed the frequent chromosomal alterations that most likely harbor the genes critical for the progression of prostate cancer. Such genetic aberrations include losses of 8p, 10q, 16q, and 13q as well as gains of 7p, 7q, 8q, and Xq. Unfortunately, the target genes for these alterations are, in most of the cases, not known. We have recently identified the androgen receptor (AR) gene as a target gene for the Xq12 amplification found in one-third of the hormone-refractory prostate cancer. The findings suggest that the AR gene amplification and overexpression is involved in the emergence of hormone-refractory prostate cancer."
10325509	Genetic and chromosomal alterations in prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia and carcinoma detected by fluorescence in situ hybridization.	"OBJECTIVE: In this review, we discuss the utility of fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) in the determination of genetic and chromosomal alterations in prostate cancer specimens. We also discuss the genetic association between prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia (PIN) and adenocarcinoma as detected by FISH and other techniques. METHODS AND RESULTS: FISH is a commonly used technique for the determination of gene and chromosome dosage. In tissue sections, FISH allows precise histopathologic correlation of multiple foci of normal epithelium, premalignant lesions, and carcinoma within a single specimen, including study of intratumoral heterogeneity. PIN and prostatic carcinoma foci have a similar proportion of genetic changes, but foci of carcinoma usually have more alterations. This supports the hypothesis that PIN is the most likely precursor of prostatic carcinoma. The most common genetic alterations in PIN and carcinoma are: (1) gain of chromosome 7, particularly 7q31; (2) loss of 8p and gain of 8q, and (3) loss of 10q, 16q and 18q. Inactivation of tumor suppressor genes and/or overexpression of oncogenes in these regions may be important for the initiation and progression of prostate cancer. CONCLUSIONS: FISH is a useful technique to determine genetic relationships between cancer and its precursors. PIN and prostatic carcinoma foci have a similar proportion of genetic alterations, suggesting that PIN is often a precursor of prostatic carcinoma. Genes on chromosomes 7, 8, 10, 16 and 18 may play an important role in both initiation and progression of prostatic carcinoma."
10329586	Differentially expressed genes in hormone refractory prostate cancer: association with chromosomal regions involved with genetic aberrations.	"Differential gene expression between the androgen sensitive human prostate cancer cell line LNCaP and an insensitive clonal variant, LNCaP-r, was demonstrated by suppression subtractive hybridization. Twenty-one sequences were identified of which 9 are homologous to known genes, 11 are represented by expressed sequence tags (ESTs), and 1 is novel. We present data for 5 of 7 sequences confirmed to be differentially expressed by Northern blot analysis and semiquantitative RT-PCR. Only one gene, fibronectin (FN), was highly overexpressed (>60-fold) in LNCaP-r cells, consistent with previously reported overexpression of FN in prostate cancer. Four sequences were down-regulated in LNCaP-r cells, including an inactive variant of the E2 ubiquitin conjugating enzyme (UEV-1), a novel metalloproteinase-related collagenase (PM5), and a potential tumor suppressor gene (breast basic conserved gene, BBC1). UEV-1 is multifunctional, regulates the cell cycle via cdk1, has homology to MMS2 and likewise functions as a DNA protection protein, and also has homology to TSG101. Aberrant splice variants of TSG101 occur frequently in both breast and prostate cancer, but its mechanism of action is unknown. FN, BBC1, and UEV-1 localize to regions of chromosomal aberration (2q3.4, 16q24.3, and 20q13.2, respectively) associated with advanced prostate cancer and thus may be highly relevant to disease progression."
10337994	"Three distinct regions of allelic loss at 13q14, 13q21-22, and 13q33 in prostate cancer."	"Chromosome 13 is one of the most frequently altered chromosomes in cancer, including carcinoma of the prostate. Two known tumor suppressor genes, RB1 and BRCA2, map to chromosome 13; however, recent reports suggest that unknown genes on 13q are more likely to be involved in the development of prostate cancer. In order more fully to define the genetic changes on chromosome 13 in prostate neoplasms, we analyzed 27 polymorphic microsatellite markers spanning the q arm for loss of heterozygosity in 40 primary tumors and in metastases from 11 other patients who died of prostate cancer. Of the 40 primary tumors, 23 (58%) showed LOH for at least one marker. Three distinct regions at q14, q21-22, and q33, defined by markers D13S267-->D13S153, D13S166-->D13S1225, and D13S259-->D13S274, showed the most frequent LOH, suggesting their involvement in the development of prostate cancer. For the 12 patients whose tumors showed LOH at these markers, the average age at diagnosis was 58 years, which was younger than that (63 years, P < 0.05) for the 28 patients whose tumors lacked LOH. Ten of the 11 (91%) metastases showed LOH with one or more markers. Two of the three most frequently deleted regions (i.e., q14 and q21-22) in the primary tumors and markers linked to the RB1, BRCA2, and EDNRB genes showed high frequencies (56-71%) of LOH in metastases. These results demonstrate that allelic loss on chromosome 13 at q14, q21-22, and q33 occurs in a subset of primary prostate tumors and is a frequent event in metastatic lesions of prostate cancer."
10344217	No evidence for a role of BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutations in Ashkenazi Jewish families with hereditary prostate cancer.	"BACKGROUND: Two genes responsible for hereditary breast cancer (BRCA1 and BRCA2) have been identified, and predisposing mutations identified. Several studies have provided evidence that germline mutations in BRCA1 and BRCA2 confer an increased risk of prostate cancer. Based on these findings, one might expect to find an increased frequency of mutations in these genes in family clusters of prostate cancer. The Ashkenazi Jewish population is unique in that it has an approximate 2% incidence of specific founder BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations (i.e., 185delAG and 5382insC in BRCA1, and 6174delT in BRCA2). METHODS: To address the question of whether or not mutations in either of these genes were overrepresented in prostate cancer families, we searched for these mutations in germline DNA samples collected from affected and unaffected members of 18 Ashkenazi Jewish families, each having at least 3 first-degree relatives affected with prostate cancer. RESULTS: No mutations were found in the BRCA1 gene in any of the 47 individuals tested. One individual possessed a BRCA2 mutation (6174delT). This individual was unaffected at the time of analysis, but had an affected paternal uncle, and an affected first cousin, neither of whom harbored the mutant gene. CONCLUSIONS: In this sample of Ashkenazi prostate cancer families, the frequency of founder BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations was not elevated, suggesting that such mutations will account for only a small, perhaps minimal, fraction of familial prostate cancer."
10383161	p16/pRb pathway alterations are required for bypassing senescence in human prostate epithelial cells.	"The cell cycle regulatory genes p16/CDKN2 and RB are frequently deleted in prostate cancers. In this study, we examined the role of alterations in p16 and pRb during growth, senescence, and immortalization in vitro of human prostate epithelial cells (HPECs). HPECs are established from normal prostate tissues and cultured on collagen-coated dishes. Our results show that p16 is reproducibly elevated at senescence in HPECs. HPECs are immortalized using human papilloma virus 16 E6 and/or E7 as molecular tools to inactivate p53 and/or pRb, respectively. Immortalization occurs infrequently in this system and only after a latent period during which additional genetic/epigenetic changes are thought to occur. Notably, all of the E6-immortalized HPEC lines but none of the E7 lines show inactivation of p16/CDKN2 (by deletion, methylation, or mutation) in association with immortalization. In contrast, E7 lines, in which pRb function is abrogated by E7 binding, retain the high levels of p16 observed at senescence. Thus, all lines show either a p16 or pRb inactivation. Analysis of six independent lines from metastatic prostate cancers reveals a similar loss of either p16 or pRb. Comparative genomic hybridization of HPECs shows that gains of chromosomes 5q, 8q, and 20 are nonrandomly associated with bypassing senescence (probability = 0.95). These results suggest that high levels of the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p16 mediate senescence G1 arrest in HPECs and that bypassing this block by a p16/pRb pathway alteration is required for immortalization in vitro and possibly tumorigenesis in vivo. Our results further indicate that inactivation of the p16/pRb pathway alone is not sufficient to immortalize HPECs and that additional genetic alterations are required for this process."
10390157	Abnormal restriction pattern of PIP gene associated with human primary prostate cancers.	"The PIP gene, localized in the 7q34 region that contains a number of fragile sites such as FRA 7H and FRA TI, codes for gp17/PIP, a protein secreted by breast apocrine tumors. We analyzed the integrity of this gene in 20 tumors of the urogenital tract. We found rearranged EcoRI fragments in 5 of 15 primary prostate carcinomas. No rearrangement was found in normal prostates derived from five patients undergoing prostatocystectomy during treatment of bladder cancers. By Southern blot hybridization with PIP gene exon-specific probes, the rearrangements were mapped at or near the 3' end of the gene. These abnormalities were found, not only in the neoplastic cells invading the prostatic tissues, but also in seminal vesicles without histologic tumoral features. These data suggest a critical role of the PIP gene or neighboring genes in prostate cancer."
10398276	Immortalization of human prostate epithelial cells by HPV 16 E6/E7 open reading frames.	"BACKGROUND: The exact pathogenesis for prostate cancer is not known. Progress made in prostate cancer research has been slow, largely due to the lack of suitable in vitro models. Here, we report our work on the immortalization of a human prostate epithelial cell line and show that it can be used as a model to study prostate tumorigenesis. METHODS: Replication-defective retrovirus harboring the human papillomavirus (HPV) type 16 E6 and E7 open reading frames was used to infect primary human prostate epithelial cells. Polymerase chain reaction, followed by Southern hybridization for the HPV 16 E6/E7, Western blot for prostatic acid phosphatase, telomeric repeat amplification protocol assay for telomerase activity, two-dimensional gels for cytokeratins, and cytogenetic analysis were undertaken to characterized the infected cells. RESULTS: The retrovirus-infected cell line, HPr-1, continued to grow in culture for more than 80 successive passages. Normal primary cells failed to proliferate after passage 6. HPr-1 cells bore close resemblance to normal primary prostate epithelial cells, both morphologically and biochemically. However, they possessed telomerase activity and proliferated indefinitely. Cytogenetic analysis of HPr-1 cells revealed a human male karyotype with clonal abnormalities and the appearance of multiple double minutes. CONCLUSIONS: The HPr-1 cells expressed prostatic acid phosphatase and cytokeratins K8 and K18, proving that they were prostate epithelial cells. They were benign in nude mice tumor formation and soft agar colony formation assay. The HPr-1 cell line is an in vitro representation of early prostate neoplastic progression."
10419008	Molecular defects of the androgen receptor.	"Defects of the androgen receptor cause a wide spectrum of abnormalities of phenotypic male development, ranging from individuals with mild defects of virilization to those with complete female phenotypes. In parallel with this phenotypic spectrum, a large number of different mutations have been identified that alter the synthesis or functional activity of the receptor protein. In many instances, the genetic mutations identified lead to an absence of the intact, full-length receptor protein. Such defects (splicing defects, termination codons, partial or complete gene deletions) invariably result in the phenotype of complete androgen insensitivity (complete testicular feminization). By contrast, single amino acid substitutions in the androgen receptor protein can result in the entire phenotypic spectrum of androgen resistant phenotypes and provide far more information on the functional organization of the receptor protein. Amino acid substitutions in different segments of the AR open-reading frame disturb AR function by distinct mechanisms. Substitutions in the DNA binding domain of the receptor appear to comprise a relatively homogeneous group. These substitutions impair the capacity of the receptor to bind to specific DNA sequence elements and to modulate the function of responsive genes. Amino acid substitutions in the hormone-binding domain of the receptor have a more varied effect on receptor function. In some instances, the resulting defect is obvious and causes an inability of the receptor to bind hormone. In other instances, the effect is subtler, and may result in the production of a receptor protein that displays qualitative abnormalities of hormone binding or from which hormone dissociates more rapidly. Often it is not possible to correlate the type of binding defect with the phenotype that is observed. Instead, it is necessary to measure the capacity of the receptor that is synthesized in functional assays in order to discern any type of correlation with phenotype. Finally, two types of androgen receptor mutation do not fit such a categorization. The first of these--the glutamine repeat expansion that is observed in spinal and bulbar muscular atrophy--leads to a reduction of receptor function that can be measured in heterologous cells or in fibroblasts established from such patients. The expression of ARs containing such expanded repeats in men is associated with a degeneration of motor neurons in the spinal cords of affected patients. Likewise, the alterations of androgen receptor structure that have been detected in advanced forms of prostate cancer also behave as gain-of-function mutations. In this latter type of mutation, the exquisite specificity of the normal androgen receptor is relaxed and the mutant receptors can be activated by a variety of steroidal and non-steroidal ligands."
10440870	Molecular cytogenetic studies of a serially transplanted primary prostatic carcinoma xenograft (CWR22) and four relapsed tumors.	"BACKGROUND: Established cell lines or xenografts from prostatic carcinoma have been infrequently studied cytogenetically. CWR22 and CWR22-R are xenografts that are unique in offering one strongly androgen-dependent and several relapsed strains of a human prostate cancer that can be investigated in the laboratory. We report on the cytogenetic characterization of the hormone-dependent CWR22, and the relapsed CWR22-R serially transplanted xenografts, in our laboratory. METHODS: We utilized a suspension harvest of the xenograft tissue to optimize our yield for metaphase chromosome studies and analyzed the hormone-dependent CWR22 and four relapsed CWR22-R xenografts. These studies were accomplished using standard G-banded analysis and fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH). A variety of DNA probes including alpha-satellite DNA probes, and chromosomal libraries, were utilized for the FISH analysis. RESULTS: Utilizing both standard cytogenetic analysis and FISH studies we have more precisely defined the CWR22 xenograft: 49,XY,+i(1)(q10),-2, der(4)t(2;4)(p21;q33), +7,+8,+12[7]/50,XY,idem, +der(2)t(2;4)(p21;q33)del(2)(q13q33)[13]. Four relapsed xenografts, CWR22R-2152, CWR22R-2524, CWR22R-2274, and CWR22R-2272 were also studied. Each of these lines demonstrated a different karyotype. CONCLUSIONS: The CWR22 karyotype offers the simplest reported karyotype for a prostate cancer tissue culture cell line or xenograft; this makes CWR22 an attractive candidate for studies of genetic changes associated with the relapse of prostate cancer treated with androgen withdrawal. Four separate, serially transplanted, relapsed CWR22-R xenografts were detected, each with a separate karyotype."
10440873	Structural analysis of the C-CAM1 molecule for its tumor suppression function in human prostate cancer.	"BACKGROUND: Recently, we demonstrated that expression of C-CAM1, an immunoglobulin (Ig)-like cell adhesion molecule (CAM), was diminished in both prostate intraepithelial neoplasia and cancer lesions, indicating that loss of C-CAM1 expression may be involved in the early events of prostate carcinogenesis. Also, increased C-CAM1 expression can effectively inhibit the growth of prostate cancer. Structurally, C-CAM1 represents a unique CAM with a potential signal transducing capability. In this study, we further analyzed the functional domain of C-CAM1 for controlling its tumor suppression function. METHODS: Recombinant adenoviruses expressing a series of C-CAM1 mutants were generated, such as AdCAMF488 (mutated C-CAM1 containing Tyr-488 --> Phe-488), AdCAMH458 (intracellular domain deletion mutant containing 458 amino acids), AdCAMG454 (intracellular domain deletion mutant containing 454 amino acids), and AdCAMDeltaD1(C-CAM1 mutant containing first Ig domain deletion). After in vitro characterization of each virus, human prostate cancer cells infected with these viruses were subcutaneously injected into athymic mouse. Both tumor incidence and volume were measured for determining the tumor suppression function for each mutant. RESULTS: In vivo tumorigenic assay indicated that AdCAMDeltaD1 without cell adhesion function still retained its tumor suppression activity. In contrast, both AdCAMH458 and AdCAMG454 decreased or lost their tumor suppression activity. CONCLUSIONS: Our data indicate that the intracellular domain of the C-CAM1 molecule is critical for inhibiting the growth of prostate cancer, suggesting that C-CAM1 interactive protein(s) may dictate prostate carcinogenesis."
10440875	Isochromosome 8q formation is associated with 8p loss of heterozygosity in a prostate cancer cell line.	"BACKGROUND: In advanced prostate cancer, loss of chromosomal regions on 8p is frequently associated with gain of 8q. We studied the gross chromosomal abnormalities associated with 8p loss of heterozygosity (LOH) in the prostate tumor cell line 1542 CP3Tx. The cell line was previously established from a primary prostatic adenocarcinoma by immortalization with a recombinant retrovirus carrying the E6 and E7 genes of human papilloma virus type 16. Allelotyping studies demonstrated LOH at multiple markers on 8p. METHODS: To investigate the relationship of 8p LOH to gross chromosomal rearrangements, and to screen for other genetic abnormalities in 1542 CP3Tx, we used comparative genomic hybridization (CGH), conventional karyotyping, fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH), and allelotyping. RESULTS: CGH revealed loss of the entire 8p arm, associated with gain of the entire 8q arm. Other abnormalities included chromosome 4 loss and chromosome 11 gain. The karyotype showed an isochromosome (8q), monosomy 4, and trisomy 11. FISH and allelotyping confirmed and extended these results. CONCLUSIONS: These results demonstrate that i(8q) formation is a mechanism for associated 8p loss and 8q gain in prostate cancer. Furthermore, the small number of chromosomal abnormalities in this cell line indicates that immortalization of low-passage cultures with viral oncogenes provides a method for obtaining cell lines for studying genetic abnormalities in prostate cancer."
10486925	Developing dendritic cell polynucleotide vaccination for prostate cancer immunotherapy.	"Immunotherapy has been successfully used to treat some human malignancies, principally melanoma and renal cell carcinoma. Genetic-based cancer immunotherapies were proposed which prime T lymphocyte recognition of unique neo-antigens arising from specific mutations. Genetic immunization (polynucleotide vaccination, DNA vaccines) is a process whereby gene therapy methods are used to create vaccines and immunotherapies. Recent findings indicate that genetic immunization works indirectly via a bone marrow derived cell, probably a type of dendritic antigen presenting cell (APC). Direct targeting of genetic vaccines to these cells may provide an efficient method for stimulating cellular and humoral immune responses to infectious agents and tumor antigens. Initial studies have provided monocytic-derived dendritic cell (DC) isolation and culture techniques, simple methods for delivering genes into these cells, and have also uncovered potential obstacles to effective cancer immunotherapy which may restrict the utility of this paradigm to a subset of patients."
10487854	Genetic analysis of prostatic atypical adenomatous hyperplasia (adenosis).	"Atypical adenomatous hyperplasia (AAH) of the prostate, a small glandular proliferation, is a putative precursor lesion to prostate cancer, in particular to the subset of well-differentiated carcinomas that arise in the transition zone, the same region where AAH lesions most often occur. Several morphological characteristics of AAH suggest a relationship to cancer; however, no definitive evidence has been reported. In this study, we analyzed DNA from 25 microdissected AAH lesions for allelic imbalance as compared to matched normal DNA, using one marker each from chromosome arms 1q, 6q, 7q, 10q, 13q, 16q, 17p, 17q, and 18q, and 19 markers from chromosome 8p. We observed 12% allelic imbalance, with loss only within chromosome 8p11-12. These results suggest that genetic alterations in transition zone AAH lesions may be infrequent. This genotypic profile of AAH will allow for comparisons with well-differentiated carcinomas in the transition zone of the prostate."
10492247	Whole genome amplification and molecular genetic analysis of DNA from paraffin-embedded prostate adenocarcinoma tumor tissue.	"PURPOSE: Often tissues obtained from prostate adenocarcinoma tumors embedded in paraffin are heterogeneous in cell type and must be carefully microdissected to acquire tissue fragments that provide homogeneous aliquots of tumor clones. Such tissue fragments rarely contain sufficient DNA to perform genomic characterization needed as an early step in localizing relevant oncogenes or tumor suppressor genes. We report that PCR using a degenerate oligonucleotide primer (DOP-PCR) can be applied to DNA samples from microdissected paraffin-embedded prostate adenocarcinomas, and this provides sufficient product for fluorescent allelic imbalance measurements or comparative genomic hybridization (CGH). MATERIALS AND METHODS: Samples were selected to be representative of those routinely obtained during prostatectomies, based on typical tumor stages (T2 and T3) and Gleason grades (range 3 +3 to 4 +5). For DNA analysis without prior DOP-PCR, only large tumors were selected to be sectioned. More than 50 specimens were analyzed. Close comparison of data obtained from analysis of DOP-PCR with those from non-DOP DNA was obtained on a subset 8 samples. To compare the allelic balance of DOP-PCR amplified DNA with that measured for non-DOP DNA, we analyzed allelic ratios on DNA from 5 different tissue samples processed by both microdissection and conventional sectioning. RESULTS: Systematic comparison of allelic imbalance results shows close similarity between DOP-PCR amplified product and non-DOP DNA, indicating that PCR product is a valid representation of the tumor genome. In addition, the difference between allelic balance and imbalance is more distinctive when microdissection followed by DOP-PCR is performed. Performing CGH on products of DOP-PCR also shows distinctive regional copy number alterations in DNA from microdissected tumor tissue. CONCLUSION: Either of these procedures allows distinction between benign and malignant genomes, and also allows independent analysis of genomic alterations in different portions of tumors. They also may be applied clinically for genomic characterization of small foci that frequently appear in prostates of elderly men who are showing no obvious pathological symptoms of adenocarcinoma."
10501358	"Association of mis-sense substitution in SRD5A2 gene with prostate cancer in African-American and Hispanic men in Los Angeles, USA."	"BACKGROUND: Prostate cancer is a very common disease in more-developed countries, but its cause is largely unknown. It is an androgen-dependent cancer, and androgens have been proposed as having a substantial role in predisposition to the disease. Thus, variations in androgen metabolism genes may affect risk of this disease. METHODS: We screened 216 African-American and 172 Hispanic men with prostate cancer, and 261 African-American and 200 Hispanic healthy men (controls), from a large prospective cohort study (the Hawaii-Los Angeles Multiethnic Cohort Study) for a mis-sense substitution in the human prostatic (or type II) steroid 5alpha-reductase (SRD5A2) gene, the product of which controls metabolic activation of testosterone to dihydrotestosterone. This mis-sense substitution results in an alanine residue at codon 49 being replaced with threonine (A49T). We also reconstructed this mutation in the SRD5A2 cDNA, and overexpressed the enzyme in mammalian tissue culture cells. FINDINGS: The A49T aminoacid substitution in the SRD5A2 gene increased the risk of clinically significant disease 7.2-fold in African-American men (95% CI=2.17-27.91; p=0.001) and 3.6-fold in Hispanic men (1.09-12.27; p=0.04). The mutant enzyme had a higher in-vitro Vmax than the normal enzyme (9.9 vs 1.9 nmol min(-1) mg(-1)). INTERPRETATION: The A49T variant of the SRD5A2 gene may be a significant contributor to the incidence of prostate cancer in African-American and Hispanic men in Los Angeles. We estimate that the population attributable risk due to this aminoacid substitution for clinically significant disease is about 8% in both populations. Increased conversion of testosterone to dihydrotestosterone catalysed by this variant steroid 5alpha-reductase enzyme may be the cause of the increased risk."
10551783	Multiple androgen response elements and a Myc consensus site in the androgen receptor (AR) coding region are involved in androgen-mediated up-regulation of AR messenger RNA.	"The androgen receptor (AR) gene is transcriptionally regulated by AR (autoregulation); however, the androgen response elements (AREs) required for this process have not been found in the AR promoter or in the 5'-flanking region. We previously showed that the AR cDNA contains AREs involved in AR mRNA autoregulation and that auto(up)regulation is reproduced in PC3 cells (a human prostate cancer cell line) expressing the human AR cDNA driven by a heterologous promoter. A 350-bp fragment of the AR cDNA contains the requisite AREs (ARE-1 and ARE-2) and, when linked upstream of a reporter gene, confers androgen inducibility in a cell-specific manner. Here we report that, although an AR cDNA harboring silent mutations of ARE-1 and ARE-2 produces a transcriptionally active AR, AR mRNA encoded by this mutant cDNA is not up-regulated in androgen-treated PC3 cells. Thus, ARE-1 and ARE-2 are essential for androgen-mediated up-regulation of AR mRNA in this model. Since ARE-1 and ARE-2 are located on separate exons (exons D and E) in the AR gene, we evaluated these AREs in their native context, a 6.5-kb AR genomic fragment. Androgen regulated the 6.5-kb AR genomic fragment and the 350-bp region of the AR cDNA at comparable levels, suggesting that sequences in exons D and E are likely to be involved in androgen-mediated up-regulation of the native AR gene. Furthermore, androgen regulated both responsive regions in U2OS cells, a human osteoblastic cell line that exhibits androgen-mediated up-regulation of native AR mRNA. DNAse I footprinting of the 350-bp region with recombinant AR (DNA- and ligand-binding domains) suggested the presence of additional AREs. Gel shift analyses and mutational studies showed that maximal androgen regulation and AR binding were dependent on the integrity of four AREs (ARE-1, ARE-1A, IVSARE, and ARE-2). While the presence of multiple, nonconsensus AREs is common among other androgen-regulated enhancers, the androgen-responsive region of the AR gene is unique because it contains exonic AREs. DNA binding studies with nuclear extracts were performed to determine whether non-AR transcription factors contribute to androgen regulation of the 350-bp region. These studies, in conjunction with mutational analysis and reporter gene assays with dominant negative Myc and Max expression vectors, showed that Myc and Max interaction with a Myc consensus site is required for androgen regulation of the 350-bp fragment. These results represent a novel interaction between AR and the Myc family of proteins and support a model of androgenic control of AR mRNA via AR and Myc family interaction with a unique internal androgen-responsive region harboring multiple exonic regulatory sequences."
10555220	[Epidemiology of familial prostatic cancer: 4-year assessment of French studies]	"OBJECTIVES: (1) To determine the frequency of familial (at least 2 cases) and hereditary forms of prostate cancer (CaP), (2) to define the results according to the patient's age at diagnosis, as various epidemiological studies have demonstrated a possible familial aggregation of CaP in about 15 to 25% of cases. Carter's familial segregation study (P.N.A.S. 1992, 89, 3367-71) showed that a genetic predisposition, with autosomal dominant transmission, could be responsible for 9% of all cases of prostate cancer. MATERIAL AND METHODS: We conducted a systematic genealogy study of patients suffering from newly diagnosed CaP or followed for known CaP in 3 French urological centres, by means of questionnaires completed by the patients. Subsequently, a national collection of families with at least 2 cases of CaP identified families with hereditary forms of CaP. Hereditary cases were considered to be those presenting at least: one CaP in three 1st degree relatives, or 3 cases over 3 generations in the same branch of the family (paternal or maternal), or finally 2 early cases before the age of 55 years. Statistical analysis used the univariate logistic regression test between family status and the medical centre or the patient's age at diagnosis. RESULTS: From July 1994 onwards, we included 801 patients (all stages combined) in the systematic study and 110 patients (13.7%) were excluded (refusal to participate, advanced age). For 691 of the families studied (Brest: 225, Nancy: 249, Paris St Louis: 217), we observed 32 (14.2%), 29 (11.6%), 37 (17.1%) of familial forms (mean: 14.2%) and 11 (4.9%), 6 (2.4%), 8 (3.7%) of hereditary forms (mean: 3.6%), respectively (no significant differences between centres). Analysis of the results according to age at diagnosis of CaP also showed a higher incidence of familial (significant difference) and hereditary forms (limit of significance) for CaP occurring at a younger age (before 65 years). The national collection collected a total of 624 familial forms of CaP, including 236 (37.8%) cases of hereditary forms; 115 families were informative for the genetic linkage study. CONCLUSION: These results confirm the data of earlier studies, revealing about 15 to 25% of familial forms of CaP and 5 to 10% of hereditary forms. Similarly, the systematic study confirmed the earlier onset of CaP in patients with a genetic predisposition. These data therefore encourage systematic questioning of patients for a family history of CaP in order to propose targeted screening of high-risk subjects in the families concerned and to intensify identification of hereditary forms in order to investigate the genes involved."
10564592	Allelic imbalance within the E-cadherin gene is an infrequent event in prostate carcinogenesis.	"By exploiting two single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) located within the E-cadherin gene, at 16q22, we have determined the frequency of allelic imbalance at this proposed tumor suppressor locus in a series of human prostatic carcinoma DNA samples. Whereas results with seven highly polymorphic microsatellite markers flanking the E-cadherin locus confirmed the existence of three separate loci on chromosome 16, at which allelic imbalance increased with increasing loss of tumor cell differentiation, no allelic imbalance within the E-cadherin gene was detected either by single-strand conformational polymorphism analysis or by direct sequencing. We conclude that the loss of E-cadherin function observed in prostate cancer is not a result of allelic deletion. Genes Chromosomes Cancer 27:104-109, 2000."
10612290	Urological malignancies and the proteomic-genomic interface.	"The urological malignancies, renal, bladder and prostate cancer, account for approximately 16% of all cancer cases. Unfortunately 5-year survival rates are relatively poor, largely a result of many cases not being diagnosed before the tumour has metastasised. There is a clear need for the identification of markers which will allow earlier detection of disease, and predict prognosis and response to therapy. In addition, they may be of use as therapeutic targets. Current advances in molecular biology are allowing the identification of a number of tumour-associated changes which could be of clinical use in the future. However, with the rapid technological advances being made in the field of proteomics, this approach could be integrated with genomics providing a complementary alternative, overcoming disparities between mRNA levels and protein production, and additionally allowing the identification of tumour-associated post-translational modifications. These approaches have already been used to identify novel genes and other cancer-related changes involved in the pathogenesis of urological malignancies. This review describes current progress in the genomic and proteomic study of urological malignancies, and highlights the potential of using proteomic technologies in the study of this group of diseases."
10629558	Androgen receptor gene mutations in hormone-refractory prostate cancer.	"Prostate cancer is considered to be one of the most hormone-dependent human malignancies. As a key mediator of hormonal response, the androgen receptor (AR) is believed to have an important role in the progression of prostate cancer. Mutations in the coding region of the AR gene have been found in both untreated and hormone-refractory prostate cancer, but the frequency of such mutations at different stages of the disease is poorly documented and even contradictory results have been published. In the present study, the frequency of AR gene mutations was determined in 30 locally recurrent and two metastatic hormone-refractory prostate tumours using the polymerase chain reaction (PCR), non-radioactive single strand conformation polymorphism (SSCP), and sequencing. The length of the polymorphic CAG repeat, which is inversely correlated with the ability of the AR to activate transcription, was also analysed as well as the GGC repeat. Twelve samples were known to contain an AR gene amplification. Altogether, one point mutation (Gly(674)-->Ala) and one microsatellite mutation (CAG(20)-->CAG(18)) were found, both in cancers containing the AR gene amplification. The mean lengths of the polymorphic CAG and GGC repeats were similar to those observed in the normal population. These results favour the view that mutations in the AR gene are rare in hormone-refractory prostate cancer and do not play an important role, at least, in local relapse. Instead, the amplification and consequent overexpression of the wild-type AR gene seem to be the most common alteration involving the AR in hormone-refractory prostate cancer."
10632123	Predictive factors in prostate cancer: current concepts from the 1999 College of American Pathologists Conference on Solid Tumor Prognostic Factors and the 1999 World Health Organization Second International Consultation on Prostate Cancer.	"Many clinically important predictive factors in prostate cancer are derived from light microscopic examination of tissue specimens by the pathologist. Two separate international consensus conferences held in 1999 addressed the contemporary status of such prognostic factors, sponsored by the College of American Pathologists (CAP) and the World Health Organization (WHO). Both conferences concluded that the following factors are recommended for routine use based on evidence from multiple published trials: TNM stage, histological grade using the Gleason system, surgical margin status, and serum prostate-specific antigen concentration. The WHO conference additionally recommended use of WHO nuclear grade, location of cancer within the prostate, and pathological effects of treatment. Other factors were categorized as promising or of unproven utility, including a wide variety of histopathologic and genetic markers. Standards are needed for analysis and quantitation of methods of tissue analysis, particularly for immunohistochemical studies and genotypic studies. This report describes the recommendations and conclusions of these two conferences."
10664249	Collision tumour in the pelvic cavity: rectal leiomyosarcoma and prostate adenocarcinoma.	"We report a rare and, to our knowledge, as yet undescribed type of collision tumour - rectal leiomyosarcoma and prostate adenocarcinoma. Our study also provides the first data on molecular alterations [polymerase chain reaction/loss of heterozygosity (LOH) analysis] of the APC, NF-1, DCC, p53, nm23-H1 and BRCA-1 genes in the two components of the collision tumour. None of the genes examined in this study expressed LOH in the prostate carcinoma component of the collision tumour. By contrast, in the leiomyosarcoma component, LOH was found at the DCC and p53 genes, proving that these two tumours did not arise from the same stem cell but represent two different neoplastic growths."
10713064	Involvement of protein kinase C delta (PKCdelta) in phorbol ester-induced apoptosis in LNCaP prostate cancer cells. Lack of proteolytic cleavage of PKCdelta.	"Phorbol esters, the activators of protein kinase C (PKC), induce apoptosis in androgen-sensitive LNCaP prostate cancer cells. The role of individual PKC isozymes as mediators of this effect has not been thoroughly examined to date. To study the involvement of the novel isozyme PKCdelta, we used a replication-deficient adenovirus (PKCdeltaAdV), which allowed for a tightly controlled expression of PKCdelta in LNCaP cells. A significant reduction in cell number was observed after infection of LNCaP cells with PKCdeltaAdV. Overexpression of PKCdelta markedly enhanced the apoptotic effect of phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate in LNCaP cells. PKCdelta-mediated apoptosis was substantially reduced by the pan-caspase inhibitor z-VAD and by Bcl-2 overexpression. Importantly, and contrary to other cell types, PKCdelta-mediated apoptosis does not involve its proteolytic cleavage by caspase-3, suggesting that allosteric activation of PKCdelta is sufficient to trigger apoptosis in LNCaP cells. In addition, phorbol ester-induced apoptosis was blocked by a kinase-deficient mutant of PKCdelta, supporting the concept that PKCdelta plays an important role in the regulation of apoptotic cell death in LNCaP prostate cancer cells."
10728701	BRCA1 and BRCA2 have a limited role in familial prostate cancer.	"Epidemiological studies have suggested that the breast cancer susceptibility genes, BRCA1 and BRCA2, may be involved in the development of prostate cancer. Several studies have screened prostate cancer populations for the presence of BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations, with few mutations identified. In this study, 22 high-risk prostate cancer families (at least three cases of prostate cancer) were screened by conformation-sensitive gel electrophoresis (CSGE) for mutations in BRCA1 and BRCA2. To maximize the chance of finding mutations in these two genes, families were also selected for the presence of at least two cases of breast and/or ovarian cancer. We identified one previously reported BRCA2 missense mutation and two previously unreported BRCA2 intron polymorphisms. No BRCA1 or BRCA2 truncating mutations were detected. Thus, BRCA1 and BRCA2 appear to have a limited role in familial prostate cancer, and families with both prostate and breast cancer may result from mutations in other predisposition genes."
10732753	Mutation analysis of P73 and TP53 in Merkel cell carcinoma.	"The p73 gene has been mapped to 1p36.33, a region which is frequently deleted in a wide variety of neoplasms including tumours of neuroectodermal origin. The p73 protein shows structural and functional homology to p53. For these reasons, p73 was considered as a positional and functional candidate tumour suppressor gene. Thus far, mutation analysis has provided no evidence for involvement of p73 in oligodendrogliomas, lung carcinoma, oesophageal carcinoma, prostatic carcinoma and hepatocellular carcinoma. In neuroblastoma, two mutations have been observed in a series of 140 tumours. In view of the occurrence of 1p deletions in Merkel cell carcinoma (MCC) and the location of p73 we decided to search for mutations in the p73 gene in five MCC cell lines and ten MCC tumours to test potential tumour suppressor function for this gene in MCC. In view of the possible complementary functions of p73 and TP53 we also examined the status of the TP53 gene. Sequence analysis of the entire coding region of the p73 gene revealed previously reported polymorphisms in four MCCs. In one MCC tumour, a mis-sense mutation located in the NH2-terminal transactivation region of the p73 gene was found. These results show that p73, analogous to neuroblastoma, is infrequently mutated in MCC. This is also the first report in which the role of TP53 in MCC has been investigated by sequencing the entire coding region of TP53. TP53 mis-sense mutations and one non-sense mutation were detected in three of 15 examined MCCs, suggesting that TP53 mutations may play a role in the pathogenesis or progression of a subset of MCCs. Moreover, typical UVB induced C to T mutations were found in one MCC cell line thus providing further evidence for sun-exposure in the aetiology of this rare skin cancer."
10797498	Fluorescence in situ hybridization evaluation of c-myc and androgen receptor gene amplification and chromosomal anomalies in prostate cancer in Japanese patients.	"BACKGROUND: Oncogene amplification and chromosomal anomalies are found in many solid tumors and are often associated with aggressiveness of cancer. We evaluated the frequency and the association of c-myc and androgen receptor (AR) gene amplification and gain of chromosome 8 or X in prostate cancer in Japanese patients. METHODS: We examined a total of 42 prostate cancer specimens, using fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH). Dual-labeling hybridization with a directly labeled centromere probe for chromosome 8 or X together with a probe for the c-myc or AR locus was performed. RESULTS: Gain of chromosome 8 was identified in 54.8% of specimens and was associated with Gleason sum and nuclear anaplasia in untreated prostate cancers. c-myc gene amplification was found in 14.3% of specimens. Gain of chromosome X was identified in 42.9% of specimens. AR gene amplification was detected in 0 of 37 untreated prostate cancers, but in 1 of 5 hormone-refractory prostate cancers. CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that c-myc and AR gene amplification and gain of chromosome 8 or X may be associated with the development and progression of prostate cancers. These results obtained in Japanese cases are consistent with the results observed in prostate cancer in Western countries."
10825006	High frequency of clonal chromosome abnormalities in prostatic neoplasms sampled by prostatectomy or ultrasound-guided needle biopsy.	"Cancer of the prostate remains poorly characterized cytogenetically. This is due in part to methodological problems and in part to the paucity of radical prostatectomies, until now the main source of material for cytogenetic analyses. We have improved existing techniques for the culturing of prostatic neoplasms removed by radical prostatectomy or sampled by ultrasound-guided needle biopsy. Successful short-term cultures were obtained from all 10 prostatectomy samples and from all 10 ultrasound-guided needle biopsies, always with a pure epithelial morphology. Of the 19 cases yielding a sufficient number of high-quality metaphases for chromosome banding analysis, the single atypical epithelial hyperplasia had a normal karyotype, whereas both prostatic intraepithelial neoplasias and 12 of 16 (75%) invasive carcinomas were shown to have clonal abnormalities. Ten of the 12 (83%) karyotypically abnormal invasive carcinomas presented structural chromosomal rearrangements. A recurrent deletion, del(10)(p13), was seen in three tumors; in one of them the terminal nature of the deletion was confirmed by two-color FISH. A del(17)(p11) was seen in one PIN lesion, but since the analysis of exons 4-8 of the TP53 tumor suppressor gene revealed no mutations, there probably was no inactivation of the second TP53 allele. Our study thus leads to the following main conclusions. First, better culturing methods allow the detection of abnormal karyotypes in a much higher percentage of prostatic neoplasms than has hitherto been possible. Second, ultrasound-guided needle biopsies of prostatic neoplasms are a sufficient source of material for cytogenetic analysis. Third, a terminal deletion of the short arm of chromosome 10, del(10)(p13), seems to identify a subgroup of prostatic cancer."
10854060	The human cyclin B1 protein modulates sensitivity of DNA mismatch repair deficient prostate cancer cell lines to alkylating agents.	DNA damage caused by alkylating agents results in a G2 checkpoint arrest. DNA mismatch repair (MMR) deficient cells are resistant to killing by alkylating agents and are unable to arrest the cell cycle in G2 phase after alkylation damage. We investigated the response of two MMR-deficient prostate cancer cell lines DU145 and LNCaP to the alkylating agent MNNG. Our studies reveal that DU145 cancer cells are more sensitive to killing by MNNG than LNCaP. Investigation of the underlying reasons for lower resistance revealed that the DU145 cells contain low endogenous levels of cyclin B1. We provide direct evidence that the endogenous level of cyclin B1 modulates the sensitivity of MMR-deficient prostate cancer cells to alkylating agents.
10855693	Isolation and characterization of the androgen receptor mutants with divergent transcriptional activity in response to hydroxyflutamide.	"A yeast genetic screening was developed to isolate androgen receptor (AR) mutants with divergent transactivation characteristics in response to hydroxyflutamide (HF), an active metabolite of flutamide used for prostate cancer treatment. Two mutants carrying the substitution C685Y or E708K were isolated and characterized. Substitution of C685Y for wild-type AR (wtAR) rendered the receptor supersensitive to androgenic activity from HF and female hormones such as 17beta-estradiol (E2) and progesterone (P). Similar effects were observed in the AR mutant, named T876AAR, isolated from LNCaP cells. Surprisingly, we found that C685YAR7, but not T876AAR7, could be activated by casodex (bicalutamide), a nonsteroidal pure antiandrogen, with an induction fold 3- to 5-fold times higher than that for wild type or T876AAR. By contrast, although replacement of E708K for wtAR showed little effect on dihydrotestosterone-mediated transactivation, E708KAR lost its transcriptional response from many other ligands. The effects of ligands on E708KAR could be controlled at the DNA-binding level owing to the finding of a significant decrease in the DNA-binding ability once E708KAR was bound to HF, E2, or P. Together, these results suggest that C685YAR can be a novel tool for assaying the androgenic activity from antiandrogens, and the mechanism revealed from E708KAR could provide a possible explanation for the partial androgen insensitivity syndrome in men with a natural E708KAR mutation."
10919663	Deletion at 13q21 is associated with aggressive prostate cancers.	"Previous cytogenetic and molecular genetic analyses suggest that the q21 band of chromosome 13 harbors a tumor suppressor gene(s) involved in prostatic carcinogenesis. The precise genetic location, however, has not been defined. In this study, we examined prostate cancer specimens and cell lines/xenograft for genetic deletions at 13q21, using the methods of tissue microdissection and duplex PCR. Deletions at 13q21 were detected in 13 of 147 (9%) prostate cancer samples. Deletion of the same region was also detected in the LNCaP cell line and the PC-82 xenograft of prostate cancer. The overlapping region of deletion in LNCaP and PC-82 spans 3.1 cM or 2.9 cR, which is equivalent to 1-3 Mb. The endothelin receptor B gene, a possible tumor suppressor gene at 13q21, was not located in the region of deletion. Among the 13 prostate neoplasms with deletion at 13q21, 5 were metastases, and 7 were poorly differentiated primary tumors. The only primary tumor that was not poorly differentiated but had deletion occurred in one of the youngest patients (49 years) at diagnosis. These results provide evidence that 13q21 may harbor an unidentified gene(s) whose inactivation occurs in some aggressive carcinomas of the prostate. In addition, this study provides a framework for the cloning and identification of the 13q21 gene(s)."
10942801	Stepwise genetic changes associated with progression of nontumorigenic HPV-18 immortalized human prostate cancer-derived cell line to a malignant phenotype.	"Cytogenetics, fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH), and comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) were used to identify genes that are involved in the development and progression of prostate cancer. For that purpose, we chose a cell line established in vitro from a prostatic adenocarcinoma which was nontumorigenic in nude mice and followed its progression to a tumorigenic cell line. Stepwise changes were observed in the cell line as it became tumorigenic. The composite karyotype at the nontumorigenic stage (CA-HPV-10) was 68 approximately 77,XXY,-(1, 9, 13, 14, 19, 22),+(4, 5, 11, 18, 20, 21),+(del(1) (q23q31)=M1 (two copies), +der(9)t(1;9)(q24 approximately q31;p23)=M5(two copies), der(14)t(14;?)(q10;?)=M17 in the majority of metaphases. These two derivative chromosomes were also observed a previous study. Our CGH analysis clearly showed that this deleted region in M1 is, in fact, translocated with derivative M5 and, in reality, is amplified. The cell line established from nodule (SCID 5019 p11), showed a number of new changes, as described; however, the most significant change was amplification of the 8q23 approximately qter region, harboring c-myc. This region was translocated with chromosomes 2, 4, and 16 as der(2)t(2;8)(q33;q23)=M12, der(4)t(4;8)(q34;q23)=M11, and der(16)t(8;16)(q24;q21)=M9. We deduce from our study that amplification of c-myc and other genes in the 8q23 approximately qter region were important in progression but did not lead to tumorigenicity. The population that became tumorigenic (SCID 5019 II) showed almost all of the same changes in the karyotype as observed in the nodular cell line; the only significant change was the appearance of der(11)t(4;11)(q32;q22)=M7 and the addition of another copy of t(3q;7p)=M2. These new changes lead to loss of chromosomes 3p, 4pter approximately q34, 6, 7q21 approximately qter, 11q22 approximately qter, and 18q, and gain of 3q, 7p, 8q23 approximately qter, and 11pter approximately q22, before the cell line became tumorigenic. The clonal selection of the population is proven by the presence of a number of the same derivative chromosomes in both the nodular and tumorigenic cell line. As it progressed to tumorigenicity, some of the same changes observed in the original study re-appear at different stages of malignancy, although it was absent in the nontumorigenic cell line. These are: der(16)t(8;16)(q24;q21)=M9 in the nodular cell line and der(11)t(4;11)(q32;q22)=M7 in the tumorigenic cell line. In our system, amplification of c-myc and other genes in der(2)t(2;8)(q33;q23)=M12,der(4) t(4;8)(q34;q23)=M11 together with the presence of der(16)t(8;16)(q24;q21)=M9 and der(11)t(4;11)(q32;q22)=M5 makes the cell line tumorigenic. It is either nontumorigenic, with the presence of a marker equivalent to der(16)=M9 and der(11)=M7 observed in the original study, and only nodular (SCID 5019 p11, present study), with the presence of number of markers with c-myc amplification (M9, M11, and M12). There is accumulation of all the above-mentioned changes in the same cell before it becomes tumorigenic."
10942807	Numerical chromosomal changes in metastatic prostate cancer following anti-androgen therapy: fluorescence in situ hybridization analysis of 5 Japanese cases.	"We used fluorescence in situ hybridization with centromere-specific probes for chromosomes 7, 8, 10, and Y to determine the copy number of these chromosomes in metastatic prostate cancers of five Japanese cases. Freshly prepared samples were obtained from prostate needle biopsies at different phases of clinical treatment; pretreatment, 1 week, 4 weeks, 12 weeks, 24 weeks post-treatment (PT), and clinical relapse. Gain of chromosomes 7 and 8, as noted in pretreatment samples; however, in post-treatment specimens (four of five cases), a remarkable reduction in the number of cells with extra copies of these chromosomes was detected. This decrease in the number of cells with additional chromosome 7 and 8 signals was correlated with the clinicohistopathological findings until 4 weeks PT. Chromosomes Y and 10 did not show numerical aberrations before treatment or changes in cells with aneusomy after treatment in all five cases. Our results suggest that gains of chromosomes 7 and 8 correlate with high grade and stage, and that changes in the cell number with aneusomy of chromosomes 7 and 8 reflect the clinical effects of anti-androgen therapy at an early phase, which may also indicate the androgen dependency of prostate cancer cells."
10945492	The rate of the founder Jewish mutations in BRCA1 and BRCA2 in prostate cancer patients in Israel.	"Inherited predisposition occurs in 5-10% of all prostate cancer (CaP) patients, but the genes involved in conferring genetic susceptibility remain largely unknown. Several lines of evidence indicate that germline mutations in BRCA1 and BRCA2 might be associated with an increased risk for CaP. Three mutations in these two genes (185delAG and 5382InsC (BRCA1) and 6174delT (BRCA2) occur in about 2.5% of the general Ashkenazi population, and the 185delAG BRCA1 mutation, in up to 1% of non-Ashkenazi Jews. In order to assess the contribution of these germline mutations to prostate cancer in Jewish Israeli patients, we tested 174 unselected prostate cancer patients (95 of Ashkenazi origin) for these mutations by PCR amplification and modified restriction enzyme digests. Patient's age range was 45-81 years (median 66), and in 24 (14.4%) the disease was diagnosed prior to 55 years of age. Nineteen (11%) and 12 (6.9%) patients had a first or second degree relative with CaP or breast cancer, respectively. Overall, five mutation carriers were detected: 2/152 (1.3%) 185delAG, 2/104 (2%) 5382InsC, and 1/158 (0.6%) 6174delT. In all carriers, the disease was diagnosed after the age of 55, and only one of them had a family history of breast and CaP. In addition, no allelic losses at the BRCA1 locus were demonstrated in 17 patients with a family history of CaP, using seven microsatellite markers. We conclude that the rate of the predominant Jewish BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations in CaP patients does not significantly differ from that of the general population, and that mutational inactivation of the BRCA1 is rare in familial CaP. Thus, germline BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations probably contribute little to CaP occurrence, to inherited predisposition, and to early onset disease in Jewish individuals."
10953161	Suppression of primary tumor growth and the progression to metastasis with p53 adenovirus in human prostate cancer.	"PURPOSE: Numerous advances have been made in gene therapy approaches for the treatment of solid tumors, including prostate cancer. While treatment of the primary tumor has been well investigated, little information is available regarding gene therapy techniques which might impact on the progression to metastatic disease. We investigate the ability of p53 adenovirus to suppress not only primary tumor growth, but also the progression to metastatic disease. Mutation of the p53 tumor suppressor gene has been associated with the progression of prostate cancer. In this study, we utilized a metastatic model for human prostate cancer to determine if introduction of the wild-type p53 gene using an adenoviral vector (rAd-p53) impacted on primary tumor growth as well as the progression to metastatic disease. MATERIALS AND METHODS: For our studies, we used the human prostate cancer cell line PC-3, which has a homozygous loss of p53 expression. Expression of exogenous p53 as well as p21 induction at various time points after infection with rAd-p53 was determined in vitro. In vivo studies were performed in nude mice following orthotopic (intraprostatic) injection of PC-3 cells. Primary tumor growth as well as the progression to metastatic disease was assessed following rAd-p53 treatment. RESULTS: In vitro studies demonstrated high levels of p53 gene expression as well as the induction of p21 gene expression. Infection of PC-3 cells with rAd-p53 resulted in marked growth inhibition, as well as wide-spread fragmentation of nuclei and secretion of nuclear matrix proteins into the culture medium consistent with the process of apoptosis. In vivo studies demonstrated that a single injection of rAd-p53 into an established orthotopic prostate tumor resulted not only in primary tumor growth suppression (treated = 97.5 +/- 25.3 mm.3 versus control = 393.4 +/- 67.2 mm.3; p = 0.0002) but also reduced the frequency of progression to metastatic disease (treated = 8 of 19 versus control = 18 of 19; p = 0.001). CONCLUSION: These experiments demonstrate that a single injection of rAd-p53 into an established orthotopic prostate tumor results not only in suppression of primary tumor growth, but also in a reduction of the frequency of progression to metastatic disease. These results suggest that a rAd-p53 gene therapy strategy may be useful in the treatment of human prostate cancer."
10972993	"Altered expression of BRCA1, BRCA2, and a newly identified BRCA2 exon 12 deletion variant in malignant human ovarian, prostate, and breast cancer cell lines."	"Germline mutations of BRCA1 and BRCA2 predispose to hereditary breast, ovarian, and possibly prostate cancer, yet structural mutations in these genes are infrequent in sporadic cancer cases. To better define the involvement of these genes in sporadic cancers, we characterized expression levels of BRCA1 and BRCA2 transcripts in cancer cell lines derived from neoplasms of the ovary, prostate, and breast and compared them with those expressed in primary cultures of normal epithelial cells established from these organs. We observed upregulation of BRCA1 and/or BRCA2 expression in six of seven ovarian cancer cell lines (OVCA420, OVCA429, OVCA432, ALST, DOV13, and SKOV3) when compared with levels found in normal ovary surface epithelial cells. Furthermore, five cancerous or immortalized prostatic epithelial cell lines (BPH-1, TSU-Pr1, LNCaP, PC-3, and DU145) also expressed higher levels of BRCA1 and/or BRCA2 mRNA than did primary cultures of normal prostatic epithelial cells. In contrast, only the estrogen receptor-positive MCF-7 cell line overexpressed these messages, whereas the estrogen receptor-negative breast cancer cell lines Hs578T, MDA-MB-231, and MDA-MB-468 showed no change in expression levels when compared with normal breast epithelial cells. In addition, expanding on our recent identification of a novel BRCA2 transcript variant carrying an in-frame exon 12 deletion (BRCA2 delta 12), we report increased expression of this variant in several ovarian, prostate, and mammary cancer cell lines (OVCA420, OVCA433, ALST, DOV13, SKOV3, TSU-Pr1, DU145, and MDA-MB-468). Most notably, high levels of BRCA2 delta 12 mRNA were detected in an estrogen receptor-positive breast cancer cell line, MCF-7, and in an androgen-independent prostate cancer cell line, DU-145. Interestingly, the wild-type BRCA2 transcript was barely detectable in DU145, which could be used as a model system for future investigations on BRCA2 delta 12 function. Taken together, our data suggest disruption of BRCA1 and/or BRCA2 gene expression in certain epithelial cancer cell lines of the ovary, prostate, and breast. Because wild-type BRCA1 and BRCA2 gene products increase during cell-cycle progression and are believed to exert growth-inhibitory action, enhanced expression of these genes in cancer cells may represent a negative feedback mechanism for curbing proliferation in fast-growing cells. At present, the functionality of BRCA2 delta 12 remains elusive."
10984506	Effects of ligand activation of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma in human prostate cancer.	"Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPARgamma) is a nuclear hormone receptor that plays a key role in the differentiation of adipocytes. Activation of this receptor in liposarcomas and breast and colon cancer cells also induces cell growth inhibition and differentiation. In the present study, we show that PPARgamma is expressed in human prostate adenocarcinomas and cell lines derived from these tumors. Activation of this receptor with specific ligands exerts an inhibitory effect on the growth of prostate cancer cell lines. Further, we show that prostate cancer and cell lines do not have intragenic mutations in the PPARgamma gene, although 40% of the informative tumors have hemizygous deletions of this gene. Based on our preclinical data, we conducted a phase II clinical study in patients with advanced prostate cancer using troglitazone, a PPARgamma ligand used for the treatment of type 2 diabetes. Forty-one men with histologically confirmed prostate cancer and no symptomatic metastatic disease were treated orally with troglitazone. An unexpectedly high incidence of prolonged stabilization of prostate-specific antigen was seen in patients treated with troglitazone. In addition, one patient had a dramatic decrease in serum prostate-specific antigen to nearly undetectable levels. These data suggest that PPARgamma may serve as a biological modifier in human prostate cancer and its therapeutic potential in this disease should be further investigated."
11059687	Adenovirus-mediated antisense ATM gene transfer sensitizes prostate cancer cells to radiation.	"Treatment failure after radiation therapy of prostate cancer (PC) could be a significant problem. Our objective is to design genetic radiosensitizing strategies for the treatment of PC. Cells from individuals with the genetic disorder ataxia telangiectasia (AT) are hypersensitive to ionizing radiation. Therefore, we examined whether attenuation of the AT gene product, AT mutated (ATM), in PC cells could result in an increased intrinsic radiosensitivity. A p53-mutant PC cell line, PC-3 was infected with adenoviral vectors, expressing antisense ATM RNA to various domains of the ATM gene. Immunoblot analyses of cellular extracts from antisense ATM-transfected PC-3 cells showed attenuated expression of the ATM protein within 2 days of viral infection. Compared with cells infected with an adeno-beta-galactosidase vector, antisense ATM-transfected PC-3 cells showed aberrant control of S-phase cell-cycle checkpoints after exposure to ionizing radiation. Under these conditions, the intrinsic radiosensitivity of the PC-3 cells was enhanced. Consequently antisense ATM gene therapy could serve as a paradigm for strategies that target the cellular survival mechanisms of an irradiated tumor cell and may provide therapeutic benefit to patients undergoing radiation therapy for PC."
11069376	Fibroblast growth factor receptor-2 mutation analysis in human prostate cancer.	"OBJECTIVE: To assess whether mutations in the hot-spots of the fibroblast growth factor (FGF) receptor-2 gene (FGFR2, exons encoding the IIIa, IIIb, IIIc and transmembrane domain, TMD) are associated with the development of prostate cancer, as the IIIb variant is the specific receptor for FGF7/KGF, an androgen-inducible paracrine factor regulating prostatic growth. Materials and methods Single-strand conformational polymorphism-polymerase chain reaction (SSCP-PCR) and cycle-sequencing analysis were used to screen FGFR2 mutations in 30 patients with prostate cancer; corresponding blood samples were analysed from 11 of the patients. The human prostate cell lines, LNCaP, PC3, DU145, PNT1A and PNT1B were also examined. In addition, 10 foci of invasive cancer from three patients who underwent radical prostatectomy were also assessed. RESULTS: Positive controls containing FGFR2 mutations (Crouzon disease and Pfieffer syndrome) were confirmed by SSCP-PCR and sequencing. Analysis of all prostate tumour samples and prostate-derived cell lines revealed no polymorphisms or mutations in the IIIa, IIIb, IIIc and TMD regions of FGFR2. CONCLUSION: FGFR2 mutations in the-FGF binding domain and the TMD are not frequent events in human prostate cancer."
11103816	Two percent of Finnish prostate cancer patients have a germ-line mutation in the hormone-binding domain of the androgen receptor gene.	"Mutations of the androgen receptor (AR) gene have been reported in prostate cancer, usually from tumor tissue specimens from late-stage, androgen-independent cancer. Occasionally, germ-line mutations have been found, but a link between AR mutations and predisposition to human prostate cancer has not been firmly established. Recently, two independent studies reported the same germ-line mutation at codon 726 in exon E (CGC to CTC) in two apparently unrelated Finnish prostate cancer patients. This arginine to leucine substitution was reported to alter the transactivational specificity of the AR protein. In the present study, the R726L mutation was analyzed by allele-specific oligohybridization in DNA specimens from 418 consecutive prostate cancer patients who reported a negative family history (sporadic group) and from 106 patients with a positive family history (hereditary group). The population frequency of the R726L mutation in blood donors was 3 of 900 (0.33%). In contrast, eight (1.91%) mutations (odds ratio = 5.8; P = 0.006) were found in the sporadic group, and two (1.89%) mutations were found in the hereditary group (odds ratio = 5.8; P = 0.09). Suggestive evidence of the segregation of the mutation with prostate cancer was seen in these two families. The present study indicates that the R726L substitution in the AR may confer an up to 6-fold increased risk of prostate cancer and may contribute to cancer development in up to 2% of Finnish prostate cancer patients. These results warrant additional large-scale studies of the significance of rare mutations and polymorphisms in candidate genes along the androgen signaling pathway as risk factors for prostate cancer."
11106824	"Body mass, age, and the APC I1307K allele in Ashkenazi Jewish prostate cancer patients."	"The I1307K mutation of the adenopolyposis coli gene (APC), located on chromosome 5q21-q22, is associated with an increased risk of cancer in Ashkenazi Jews. In the present study, we analyzed age and body mass of Ashkenazi Jewish prostate cancer patients, with and without the APC I1307K mutation. Participants in our study were found through urology and radiation oncology clinics, and all eligible patients were asked to take part. A familial history was obtained by interview or self-report questionnaire. Histological confirmation of diagnosis was obtained for all subjects. The I1307K allele of the APC gene was detected by amplification of lymphocyte DNA from peripheral blood according to standard polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and dot blot procedures. We studied 135 Ashkenazi Jewish men with prostate cancer. The youngest was 49, the oldest 80, average age 68 +/- 6.88 (mean +/- SD). The older patients carrying the wild type APC allele tended to have a lower body mass than the younger ones (r = -.27, P =.002). Of 71 patients under 70 years old, 65 carried the wild type APC allele, and had a body mass index of 28. 7 +/- 4.23 kg/m(2). The six men under age 70 carrying the I1307K APC allele had a body mass index of 26.87 +/- 1.44 kg/m(2). The difference in body mass index of the two groups is significant (P =. 032, t test for unequal variance). Increased body mass is a prostate cancer risk factor, and hereditary prostate cancer is associated with younger patients. Therefore, our finding, that patients under age 70 carrying the I1307K allele are significantly thinner than those carrying the wild type allele, suggests that the APC I1307K allele is also a prostate cancer risk factor. Our results are in accord with other studies indicating that APC mutations increase the risk of prostate cancer."
11170146	Discovery of new DNA amplification loci in prostate cancer by comparative genomic hybridization.	"BACKGROUND: DNA sequence amplifications are involved in the progression of many tumor types, and have also been found in advanced prostate cancer. The aim of this study was to detect new loci of DNA amplifications in prostate cancer. METHODS: Comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) was used for whole genome screening of DNA sequence copy number alterations in 27 advanced prostate cancers. RESULTS: The most prevalent changes were losses of 8p, 13q (52%, each), 6q (48%), 18q (37%), 5q (30%), 2q, 4q and 16q (26%, each), and gains of 8q (48%), Xq (40%), and Xp (26%). In addition, 16 high-level amplifications were found. These included Xq12 (five), 8q24 (two), and 11q13 (one) with known putative target genes (androgen receptor, MYC and Cyclin D1), and 1q21-25 (three), 10q22 (two), 17q23-24 (two), and 8q21 (one) where the target genes remain unknown. CONCLUSIONS: High-level amplifications at different chromosomal sites occur in advanced prostate cancer. The detection of amplified chromosomal regions may serve as a starting point to discover novel oncogenes involved in prostate cancer progression."
11170152	Genetic changes in familial prostate cancer by comparative genomic hybridization.	"BACKGROUND: Germline mutations in recessive cancer predisposition genes are uncovered by somatic genetic deletions during tumor development. Analysis of genetic changes in tumor tissues from patients with an inherited predisposition may therefore highlight regions of the genome containing susceptibility or modifier genes. Our aim was to characterize genetic changes in familial prostate cancer METHODS: Twenty-one primary prostate cancers from 19 Finnish prostate cancer families were analyzed for somatic genetic changes by comparative genomic hybridization (CGH). RESULTS: The average number of genetic alterations per tumor was 4.0 +/- 1.9, distributed equally among losses and gains. The most common losses were found at chromosomal regions 13q14-q22 (29%), 8p12-pter (24%), and 6q13-q16 (14%), and the most common gains at 19p (25%), 19q (14%) and 7q (14%). CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that prostate cancers in genetically predisposed individuals arise for the most part through similar somatic genetic progression pathways as sporadic prostate cancers. This also implies that the biological properties of tumors from the two groups may not be different from one another."
11172902	Loss of the short arm of the Y chromosome in human prostate carcinoma.	"A change in Y chromosome number is one of the many cytogenetic abnormalities reported in human prostate tumors. However, reports in the literature have varied regarding the frequency of Y loss or gain and the significance of Y aneusomy with respect to the biology of the disease. We have conducted an analysis of the Y chromosome in malignant and benign hyperplastic human prostate epithelium in order to determine whether regional Y loss occurs in prostate cancer. To accomplish this we performed dual-color fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) on serial sections of paraffin-embedded prostate tumor tissues using either a Yp (SRY), Ycen (alpha-satellite) or Yq (satellite 3) probe, and an Xcen (alpha-satellite) probe that served as a control for hybridization and nuclear truncation. The results of our FISH analysis demonstrated loss of Yp in the malignant epithelium of 14/40 (35%) prostate tumor sections examined. We also found loss of Yq in 4/40 (10%) of the samples, with one of these exhibiting accompanying Yp loss. The remaining samples, 23/40 (58%), retained both Yp and Yq markers, with no evidence of either Ycen loss or Y gain in any of the tumor samples examined. In addition, Y loss was detected in the benign hyperplastic regions in nearly one-half of the tissue sections that exhibited Y loss in the malignant epithelium. These results demonstrate that regional chromosome Y loss occurs in prostate cancer, that loss of Yp is the most frequent event, and suggest that this loss may in some cases be a precursor to prostate malignancy."
11179903	Pregnenolone stimulates LNCaP prostate cancer cell growth via the mutated androgen receptor.	"Pregnenolone (P(5)), a common precursor of many steroids, is present in the blood of normal adult men at concentrations of 1-3 nM. In vitro, P(5) was found to stimulate LNCaP-cell proliferation 7-8-fold at a physiological concentration (2 nM), and 3-4-fold at a subphysiological concentration (0.2 nM). Growth stimulation at the 2-nM concentration was comparable with that of the androgen, dihydrotestosterone at its physiological concentration (0.5 nM; 9-10-fold increase in cell number). To determine whether P(5) or its metabolites were mediating this growth response, LNCaP cells were incubated with [3H]P(5) and high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) was performed. After a 48-h exposure, two unidentified metabolites were detected. Although, the P(5) metabolites slightly increased LNCaP-cell growth in vitro, their effect was significantly less than P(5) alone, suggesting that the growth stimulation was mediated by P(5) itself. We further showed that P(5) sustained its proliferative activity in vivo and stimulated the growth of LNCaP-tumor xenografts in intact male SCID mice as well as in castrated animals. In order to determine whether P(5) was binding to a specific site in LNCaP cells, receptor binding studies were performed. Scatchard analysis predicted for a single class of binding sites with K(d)=1.4 nM. Studies were performed to determine the effects of P(5) on transcription mediated by wild-type and LNCaP androgen receptors. P(5) was shown to activate transcription through the LNCaP androgen receptor (AR), but not the wild-type AR. This implies that P(5) most likely stimulates LNCaP-cell proliferation through binding to the cellular mutated AR present in LNCaP cells. We have also demonstrated that drugs designed to be antagonists of the androgen, progesterone and estrogen receptors, and one of our novel compounds designed to be an inhibitor of androgen synthesis, were potent inhibitors of the AR-mediated transcriptional activity induced by P(5), and were able to inhibit LNCaP-cell proliferation. These findings suggest that some prostate cancer patients who appear to become hormone-independent may have tumors which are stimulated by P(5) via a mutated AR and that these patients could benefit from treatment with antiestrogens, antiprogestins, or with some of our novel androgen synthesis inhibitors."
11205922	Independent association of angiogenesis index with outcome in prostate cancer.	"New molecular factors have been characterized that are associated with the prognosis of prostate carcinoma patients, including p53 status and angiogenesis. We reported recently that mutant p53 (mp53) was associated with decreased expression of an endogenous inhibitor of angiogenesis, thrombospondin-1 (TSP-1), and increased microvessel density in melanoma and breast cancer. In this study, we performed a similar analysis on primary prostate carcinoma to determine whether these factors were associated with each other or patient outcomes. Paraffin-embedded specimens of 98 cases of primary prostate carcinoma were obtained and examined to confirm tissue diagnosis and Gleason scores. Carcinoma-specific levels of p53, TSP-1, and tumor angiogenesis were determined using semiquantitative immunohistochemistry (IHC) methods. Acquisition of mp53 was significantly associated with decreased TSP-1 (P = 0.002) and increased angiogenesis (P < 0.0001). An angiogenesis index integrating mp53, TSP-1, and angiogenesis (CD31) scores was found to be an independent predictor of survival in univariate and multivariate analyses that included Gleason score, clinical stage, and patient age. Further validation of the angiogenesis index in prostate carcinoma may provide a new tool to stratify patient risk."
11212241	"Use of camptothecin-resistant mammalian cell lines to evaluate the role of topoisomerase I in the antiproliferative activity of the indolocarbazole, NB-506, and its topoisomerase I binding site."	"NB-506 is a topoisomerase I (top1) inhibitor in clinical trials. In this study, we used a series of camptothecin (CPT)-resistant cell lines with known top1 alterations. We show that three mutations in different domains of the top1 enzyme that confer CPT resistance also confer cross-resistance to NB-506. The CPT-resistant cell lines and corresponding mutations were: human prostate carcinoma cells DU-145/RC1 (mutation R364H), Chinese hamster fibroblasts DC3F/C10 (mutation G503S), and human leukemia CEM/C2 cells (N722S). This result suggests that NB-506 and CPT share a common binding site in the top1-DNA complex. We next used these three cell lines and their parental cells to study the relationship between top1 poisoning by NB-506 and antiproliferative activity. We found that the CPT-resistant cells were only 2-10-fold resistant to NB-506, which suggests that NB-506 targets other cellular processes/pathways besides top1. This conclusion was further supported by the limited cross-resistance of top1-deficient murine leukemia P388/CPT45 cells (2-fold). Cross-resistance was also limited for J-109,382, an isomer of NB-506 that does not intercalate into DNA, indicating that the non-top1-mediated antiproliferative activity of NB-506 is not attributable to DNA intercalation. Together, these data indicate that NB-506 and indolocarbazoles are promising agents to overcome CPT resistance."
11221439	State-of-the-art prostate cancer treatment and research. A report from the Cancer Institute of New Jersey.	"Prostate cancer is a devastating disease that will be diagnosed in approximately 200,000 men in 2001. New methods for screening, prevention, and treatment are being developed. In addition, novel agents for the treatment of resistant prostate cancer are being developed in clinical trials. This review summarizes the recent efforts in diet, screening, novel systemic therapies, and alternative medicine for prostate cancer."
11234884	Mutations of PTEN/MMAC1 in primary prostate cancers from Chinese patients.	"PTEN/MMAC1 is a putative tumor suppressor gene located on 10q23, one of the most frequently deleted chromosomal regions in human prostate cancer. Although mutations of PTEN have often been detected in metastases of prostate cancer, localized tumors have shown lower rates of mutation, which have varied from 0 to 20% among different studies. It is unknown whether the rate of PTEN mutations is different in prostate cancer from Asian men compared with Western men. To further clarify the role of PTEN in prostate cancer and to examine the gene for mutations in Asian men, we analyzed 32 cases of primary prostate cancers from Chinese patients, each of whom was not diagnosed by screening with serum prostate-specific antigen, for PTEN mutations using the methods of tissue microdissection, single-strand conformational polymorphism, and direct DNA sequencing. Seventy % of the tumors were Gleason scores 8-10, whereas the remainder were Gleason score 7. Six metastases of prostate cancer from American patients were also analyzed. Five of 32 (16%) primary prostate cancers from Chinese men and two of six metastases from American men showed mutations in a total of 10 codons of PTEN, which involved exons 1, 2, 5, 8, and 9. Two of the mutations were truncation type, whereas the rest were missense mutations. The mutation frequency in these cases from Asian patients was higher than that in our previous study of cases in radical prostatectomy specimens from American men, in which the 40 primary tumors were lower grade and had been detected by serum prostate-specific antigen test. We conclude that mutation of PTEN occurs more often in primary prostate cancers of Chinese men, whose tumors are high grade and reflective of an unscreened population."
11244506	Role of direct interaction in BRCA1 inhibition of estrogen receptor activity.	"The BRCA1 gene was previously found to inhibit the transcriptional activity of the estrogen receptor [ER-alpha] in human breast and prostate cancer cell lines. In this study, we found that breast cancer-associated mutations of BRCA1 abolish or reduce its ability to inhibit ER-alpha activity and that domains within the amino- and carboxyl-termini of the BRCA1 protein are required for the inhibition. BRCA1 inhibition of ER-alpha activity was demonstrated under conditions in which a BRCA1 transgene was transiently or stably over-expressed in cell lines with endogenous wild-type BRCA1 and in a breast cancer cell line that lacks endogenous functional BRCA1 (HCC1937). In addition, BRCA1 blocked the expression of two endogenous estrogen-regulated gene products in human breast cancer cells: pS2 and cathepsin D. The BRCA1 protein was found to associate with ER-alpha in vivo and to bind to ER-alpha in vitro, by an estrogen-independent interaction that mapped to the amino-terminal region of BRCA1 (ca. amino acid 1-300) and the conserved carboxyl-terminal activation function [AF-2] domain of ER-alpha. Furthermore, several truncated BRCA1 proteins containing the amino-terminal ER-alpha binding region blocked the ability of the full-length BRCA1 protein to inhibit ER-alpha activity. Our findings suggest that the amino-terminus of BRCA1 interacts with ER-alpha, while the carboxyl-terminus of BRCA1 may function as a transcriptional repression domain. Oncogene (2001) 20, 77 - 87."
11250774	Role of androgen receptor in prostate cancer.	"The growth of prostate cancer is sensitive to androgen, and hormonal therapy has been used for treatment of advanced cancer. About 80% of prostate cancers initially respond to hormonal therapy, however, more than half of the responders gradually become resistant to this therapy. Changes in tumors from an androgen-responsive to an androgen-unresponsive state have been widely discussed. Since androgen action is mediated by androgen receptor (AR), abnormalities of AR is believed to play an important role of the loss of androgen responsiveness in prostate cancer. This article focused on the role of AR in the progression of prostate cancer."
11254448	Evaluation of linkage and association of HPC2/ELAC2 in patients with familial or sporadic prostate cancer.	"To investigate the relationship between HPC2/ELAC2 and prostate cancer risk, we performed the following analyses: (1) a linkage study of six markers in and around the HPC2/ELAC2 gene at 17p11 in 159 pedigrees with hereditary prostate cancer (HPC); (2) a mutation-screening analysis of all coding exons of the gene in 93 probands with HPC; (3) family-based and population-based association study of common HPC2/ELAC2 missense variants in 159 probands with HPC, 249 patients with sporadic prostate cancer, and 222 unaffected male control subjects. No evidence for linkage was found in the total sample, nor in any subset of pedigrees based on characteristics that included age at onset, number of affected members, male-to-male disease transmission, or race. Furthermore, only the two previously reported missense changes (Ser217Leu and Ala541Thr) were identified by mutational analysis of all HPC2/ELAC exons in 93 probands with HPC. In association analyses, family-based tests did not reveal excess transmission of the Leu217 and/or Thr541 alleles to affected offspring, and population-based tests failed to reveal any statistically significant difference in the allele frequencies of the two polymorphisms between patients with prostate cancer and control subjects. The results of this study lead us to reject the three alternative hypotheses of (1) a highly penetrant, major prostate cancer-susceptibility gene at 17p11, (2) the allelic variants Leu217 or Thr541 of HPC2/ELAC2 as high-penetrance mutations, and (3) the variants Leu217 or Thr541 as low-penetrance, risk-modifying alleles. However, we did observe a trend of higher Leu217 homozygous carrier rates in patients than in control subjects. Considering the impact of genetic heterogeneity, phenocopies, and incomplete penetrance on the linkage and association studies of prostate cancer and on the power to detect linkage and association in our study sample, our results cannot rule out the possibility of a highly penetrant prostate cancer gene at this locus that only segregates in a small number of pedigrees. Nor can we rule out a prostate cancer-modifier gene that confers a lower-than-reported risk. Additional larger studies are needed to more fully evaluate the role of this gene in prostate cancer risk."
11258198	Pharmacogenetics of human androgens and prostatic diseases.	"Prostate cancer (PCa) and benign prostatic hypertrophy (BPH) are two common and growing public health problems in the Western world. We review here the recent biochemical and pharmacogenetic literature related to these two prostatic disorders. We focus first on constitutional ('germline') single nucleotide polymorphism (SNPs) at the steroid 5 alpha-reductase (SRD5A2) locus, which encodes the human prostatic (or Type II) steroid 5 alpha-reductase enzyme. The investigations reviewed point to several uses of personalised medicine at the SRD5A2 locus. In addition, we report on recent identification of somatic pharmacogenetic alterations at the androgen receptor (AR) locus, which encodes the human androgen receptor, suggesting that this also may be a fruitful field of investigation, with important clinical applications. Pharmacogenomic investigation of constitutional and somatic DNA changes in human genes predisposing to cancer may lead to significant advances in chemoprevention, presymptomatic diagnosis and improved treatment of PCa."
11295606	New concepts in the pathology of prostatic epithelial carcinogenesis.	"The development of drugs to prevent prostate cancer is underway, yet monitoring the potential efficacy of these agents during clinical trials relies on measuring intermediate endpoints. In this review, various candidate markers are presented that are under different stages of evaluation as intermediate endpoint biomarkers. In addition, the near future will bring an unprecedented wave of new potential biomarkers. For instance, through genomics-based methods many new genes are being discovered whose altered expression may be involved in different phases of prostate cancer development and progression. In the development of rational approaches for selecting which of these untested biomarkers may be useful to measure systematically, there must be an improved understanding of the mechanisms of prostatic carcinogenesis. We submit that this improved understanding will come through new knowledge of the biology of normal prostate epithelial cells, the determination of the precise target cells of transformation, and how their growth regulation is genetically and epigenetically perturbed during the phases of initiation and progression. In this review, therefore, we also present our recent immune-mediated oxidant injury and regeneration hypothesis of why and how the prostate is targeted for carcinogenesis."
11306453	Mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase 4 metastasis suppressor gene expression is inversely related to histological pattern in advancing human prostatic cancers.	"We have shown recently (B. A. Yoshida et al., Cancer Res., 59: 5483-5487) that mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase 4 (MKK4) can suppress AT6.1 rat prostate cancer metastases in vivo. Evaluation of the expression of components of the MKK4 signaling cascade showed a loss or down-regulation of expression of MKK4 or c-Jun, a downstream mediator of MKK4, in six of eight human prostate cancer cell lines. Given these findings, we next assessed whether MKK4 dysregulation occurs during the development of clinical prostate cancer. Immunohistochemical studies showed high levels of MKK4 expression in the epithelial but not the stromal compartment of normal prostatic tissues. In neoplastic tissues, a statistically significant, direct, inverse relationship between Gleason pattern and MKK4 was established. These results demonstrate that MKK4 protein is consistently down-regulated during prostate cancer progression and support a role for dysregulation of its signaling cascade in clinical disease. To test the possibility that down-regulation of MKK4 protein is the result of allelic loss, metastatic prostate cancer lesions were examined for loss of heterozygosity (LOH) within the MKK4 locus (D17S969). These studies showed a 31% (5 of 16) LOH of MKK4 that is not associated with coding region mutations, which suggests that the nucleotide sequence of the gene in the remaining allele is infrequently mutated."
11310821	Fas gene mutations in prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia and concurrent carcinoma: analysis of laser capture microdissected specimens.	"Fas (Apo-1/CD95) is a cell-surface receptor involved in cell death signaling through binding of Fas ligand. Mutations of the Fas gene might be involved in proliferative diseases of the prostate by prolongation of programmed cell death of prostatic epithelial cells. Using the laser capture microdissection method, Fas gene mutations were examined on genomic DNA extracted from lesions with high-grade prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia (HGPIN), a possible precursor of prostatic cancer (PCA), and from PCA. A total of 193 lesions, 111 with HGPIN, 55 with PCA, and 27 benign glands, were microdissected from 27 patients with PCA. Polymerase chain reaction-amplified products were directly sequenced. Loss of heterozygosity (LOH) was examined at four sites of known polymorphisms. Fas gene mutations were detected in HGPIN: 4 of 27 (14.8%) cases or 4 of 111 (3.6%) lesions. All were point mutations: three missense and one nonsense in the death domain. Benign proliferative glands adjoining HGPIN and/or PCA, and PCA never showed mutations. LOH was found in 31.3% of PCA and 25% of HGPIN lesions, but was never found in benign glands. Exclusive occurrence of Fas mutations in HGPIN might underlie the development of these lesions. Occasional findings of LOH in HGPIN and PCA suggested that genetic instability might occur during the early phase of prostatic carcinogenesis."
11319802	Suppression of tumorigenicity in the human prostate cancer cell line M12 via microcell-mediated restoration of chromosome 19.	"Previously we immortalized human, nontransformed prostate epithelial cells with SV40 large T-antigen (SV40TAg) and derived increasingly aggressive sublines from the immortalized line. The progression of the tumorigenic sublines to metastatic capacity was accompanied by the formation of an unbalanced translocation between chromosomes 16 and 19, resulting in loss of 19p and proximal 19q. To test whether the tumorigenic and/or metastatic phenotype was causally related to this genetic alteration, we restored a neo-tagged human chromosome 19 to M12 cells by microcell-mediated transfer and assessed their growth. In vitro, the resultant hybrids grew more slowly in monolayer culture and showed a significant reduction in anchorage-independent growth as compared to M12neo controls. In vivo, all mice (13/13) injected subcutaneously (SC) with control M12neo cells developed tumors after 9-15 days. In contrast, 9/15 mice injected SC with microcell-transferred chromosome 19 hybrid cells failed to form tumors, with 6/15 producing very small tumors after 120 days. Analysis of three of these six tumors showed consistent, new chromosomal changes. Furthermore, in one of the tumors, loss of a chromosome 19 was noted in 40% of the cells. After intraprostatic injections of the hybrid cells, only 2/7 mice developed microscopic tumors, with no metastases. These data suggest the presence of a gene or genes on chromosome 19 that function to suppress growth."
11326317	Evidence of chromosomal instability in prostate cancer determined by spectral karyotyping (SKY) and interphase fish analysis.	"The way in which cytogenetic aberrations develop in prostate cancer (CaP) is poorly understood. Spectral karyotype (SKY) analysis of CaP cell lines has shown that they have unstable karyotypes and also have features associated with chromosomal instability (CIN). To accurately determine the incidence of de novo structural and numerical aberrations in vitro in CaP, we performed SKY analysis of three independent clones derived from one representative cell line, DU145. The frequent generation of new chromosomal rearrangements and a wide variation in the number of structural aberrations within two to five passages suggested that this cell line exhibited some of the features associated with a CIN phenotype. To study numerical cell-to-cell variation, chromosome 8 aneusomy was assessed in the LNCaP, DU145, and PC-3 cell lines and a patient cohort of 15 CaP primary tumors by interphase fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH). This analysis showed that a high frequency of numerical alteration affecting chromosome 8 was present in both in vitro and in CaP tissues. In comparison to normal controls, the patient cohort had a statistically significant (P<.05), greater frequency of cells with one and three centromere 8 copies. These data suggest that a CIN-like process may be contributing towards the generation of de novo numerical and structural chromosome abnormalities in CaP."
11327116	Molecular genetics of prostate cancer.	"The molecular mechanisms underlying the development and progression of prostate cancer are poorly understood. Epidemiological studies have suggested that 5-10% of all prostate cancers are familial, and numerous chromosomal loci have been associated with prostate cancer in multicentre linkage studies. However, no putative susceptibility genes harboured in these chromosomal regions have thus far been identified. Several recurrent chromosomal alterations in prostate cancer have been detected in comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) and loss of heterozygosity (LOH) analysis. The target genes for many of these aberrations are still not known. It seems that the androgen receptor (AR) signalling pathway plays a crucial role in both early development as well as in late progression of the disease. Both germ-line and somatic genetic alterations in the AR gene have been demonstrated in prostate cancer patients. The intention of this review is to summarize the current knowledge of molecular mechanisms in the development of prostate cancer."
11329019	Overexpression of petunia chalcone isomerase in tomato results in fruit containing increased levels of flavonols.	"Tomatoes are an excellent source of the carotenoid lycopene, a compound that is thought to be protective against prostate cancer. They also contain small amounts of flavonoids in their peel ( approximately 5-10 mg/kg fresh weight), mainly naringenin chalcone and the flavonol rutin, a quercetin glycoside. Flavonols are very potent antioxidants, and an increasing body of epidemiological data suggests that high flavonoid intake is correlated with a decreased risk for cardiovascular disease. We have upregulated flavonol biosynthesis in the tomato in order to generate fruit with increased antioxidant capacity and a wider range of potential health benefit properties. This involved transformation of tomato with the Petunia chi-a gene encoding chalcone isomerase. Resulting transgenic tomato lines produced an increase of up to 78 fold in fruit peel flavonols, mainly due to an accumulation of rutin. No gross phenotypical differences were observed between high-flavonol transgenic and control lines. The phenotype segregated with the transgene and demonstrated a stable inheritance pattern over four subsequent generations tested thus far. Whole-fruit flavonol levels in the best of these lines are similar to those found in onions, a crop with naturally high levels of flavonol compounds. Processing of high-flavonol tomatoes demonstrated that 65% of flavonols present in the fresh fruit were retained in the processed paste, supporting their potential as raw materials for tomato-based functional food products."
11336792	Mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway is involved in alpha6 integrin gene expression in androgen-independent prostate cancer cells: role of proximal Sp1 consensus sequence.	"Metastatic diseases of prostate cancer reveal high expression of alpha6 integrin and the activation of mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAP kinase). Therefore, the present study was conducted to examine whether MAP kinase pathway is involved in the alpha6 integrin gene expression in androgen-independent prostate cancer cell lines. alpha6 integrin mRNA expression, the alpha6 integrin promoter-induced luciferase activities and MAP kinase enzyme activities in androgen-independent LNCaP and PC-3 cell lines were higher than those in androgen-dependent LNCaP. Deletion and mutation analysis showed that Sp1 consensus sequence at -48 to -43 bp from the transcription start site was necessary for basal promoter activity. Binding of Sp1 to its consensus sequence in three cell lines was confirmed by electrophoretic mobility shift assays. Sp1 binding to its consensus sequence, as well as promoter activity and mRNA expression, were found to be inhibited by an inhibitor of MAP kinase kinase 1 and 2, U0126, in the androgen-independent cell lines. Our results indicate that the proximal Sp1 is necessary for basal promoter activity of the alpha6 integrin, suggesting that signal transduction from MAP kinases to activation of Sp1 might be involved in alpha6 integrin gene expression in androgen-independent prostate cancer cell lines."
11350116	"A tissue-specific enhancer of the prostate-specific membrane antigen gene, FOLH1."	"Prostate-specific membrane antigen (PSMA) is an integral membrane protein that is highly expressed on the surface of prostate epithelial cells. It is also expressed on the vascular endothelium of a number of tumor types. We have used an enhancer trap approach with randomly cleaved overlapping DNA fragments from an approximately 55-kb P1 cosmid insert encompassing the 5' half and upstream sequences of the PSMA gene (FOLH1) to isolate an enhancer that strongly activates the FOLH1 core promoter region. The enhancer (PSME) is located in the third intron about 12 kb downstream from the start site of transcription and is characterized by a 72-bp direct repeat within a 331-bp core region. The PSME activates transcription from its own and heterologous promoters in prostate cell lines; enhancement is greatest in the PSMA-expressing cell line LNCaP (>250-fold). The PSME shows essentially no activity in five nonprostate cell lines. PSME-enhanced expression is repressed in the presence of androgen, mimicking the repression of the endogenous FOLH1 gene. The data demonstrate that both cell-type specificity and androgen regulation are intrinsic properties of the enhancer. These properties make the PSME an excellent candidate for regulation of gene expression in gene therapy approaches to prostate cancer."
11355945	A missense substitution A49T in the steroid 5-alpha-reductase gene (SRD5A2) is not associated with prostate cancer in Finland.	"Prostatic steroid 5-alpha-reductase gene (SRD5A2) encodes a critical enzyme involved in the conversion of testosterone to dihydrotestosterone. A germline mis-sense substitution (A49T) leads to a variant SRD5A2 protein, which has a 5-fold higher in vitro V(max)than the wild-type protein (Ross et al, 1998; Makridakis et al, 1999). The A49T variant was recently associated with 2.5 to 3.28-fold increased risk of prostate cancer (PC) in African-American and Hispanic men (Makridakis et al, 1999). Also, Jaffe et al (2000) reported an association between A49T and more aggressive disease among Caucasian patients. Here, we report that the prevalence of the A49T variant in 449 Finnish PC patients was 6.0%, not significantly different from 6.3% observed in 223 patients with benign prostatic hyperplasia or 5.8% in 588 population-based controls (odds ratio for PC 1.04, 95% C.I. 0.62-1.76, P = 0.89). There was no association between A49T and the family history of the patients nor with tumour stage or grade. Our results argue against a prominent role of the A49T variant as a genetic risk factor for prostate cancer development and progression in the Finnish population."
11402322	Limiting the location of putative human prostate cancer tumor suppressor genes on chromosome 18q.	"We studied loss of heterozygosity (LOH) on the long arm of human chromosome 18 in prostate cancer to determine the location of a putative tumor suppressor gene (TSG) and to correlate these losses with the pathological grade and stage of the cancer. Of 48 specimens analysed 17 (35.4%) lost at least one allele on chromosome 18q. All the specimens with allelic losses lost at least one allele within chromosomal region 18q21. Allelic losses picked at D18S51 (19%) and D18S858 (17%). A 0.58 cM DNA segment that includes the D18S858 locus and is flanked by the microsatellite loci D18S41 and D18S381, was lost in eight (47%) of 17 specimens with allelic losses. This segment was designated as a LOH cluster region 1 (LCR 1). Although Smad2 resides within LCR 1, it was not mutated in any of the six prostate cell lines (five prostate cancer cell lines and one immortalized prostate epithelial cell line) analysed, suggesting that it is not a candidate TSG in prostate cancer. A second LCR at 18q21, LCR 2, includes the D18S51 locus and is flanked by the D18S1109 and D18S68 loci, which are separated by 7.64 cM. LCR 2 was lost in six (35%) of the 17 specimens with chromosome 18q losses. These results suggest that chromosome 18q21 may harbor two candidate prostate cancer TSGs. The candidate TSGs DCC and Smad4 are located centromeric to the LCRs. No alleles were lost within or in close proximity to these genes, suggesting that they are not targets for inactivation by allelic losses in prostate cancer. Although there was no obvious correlation between chromosome 18q LOH and the pathological grade or stage, three (37.5%) of eight low-grade cancers and nine (32.1%) of 28 organ-confined cancers lost alleles at 18q21, suggesting that allelic losses are relatively early events in the development of invasive prostate cancer."
11420744	Loss of expression of human spectrin src homology domain binding protein 1 is associated with 10p loss in human prostatic adenocarcinoma.	"The gene encoding human spectrin Src homology domain binding protein 1, or Hssh3bp1, which is a marker of macropinocytic vesicles and a potential regulator of macropinocytosis, co-localizes to a YAC containing chromosome 10p sequences at loci D10S89 and D10S111 that are frequently deleted in prostate tumors. Expression of Hssh3bp1 was evaluated at the protein level in 17 paired normal and malignant prostate tumor samples using the monoclonal antibody 2G8 to Hssh3bp1. These experiments demonstrated that 4/6 tumors (67%) with 10p deletion failed to express Hssh3bp1 protein compared to 5/11 (46%) tumors with intact 10p. Thus, loss of Hssh3bp1 expression is concordant with allelic loss of adjacent 10p sequences in human prostate tumors. In addition, two prostate tumor cell lines contain an exon skipping mutation in the Hssh3bp1 gene that leads to the abnormal splicing of the mRNA and loss of a portion of Abl tyrosine kinase SH3 domain binding site in the protein. These data are consistent with a role for Hssh3bp1 as a candidate tumor suppressor gene inactivated during prostate tumorigenesis."
11423979	"Mutations in the mitotic check point gene, MAD1L1, in human cancers."	"Aneuploidy is a characteristic of the majority of human cancers, and recent studies suggest that defects of mitotic checkpoints play a role in carcinogenesis. MAD1L1 is a checkpoint gene, and its dysfunction is associated with chromosomal instability. Rare mutations of this gene have been reported in colon and lung cancers. We examined a total of 44 cell lines (hematopoietic, prostate, osteosarcoma, breast, glioblastoma and lung) and 133 fresh cancer cells (hematopoietic, prostate, breast and glioblastoma) for alterations of MAD1L1 by RT-PCR-SSCP and nucleotide sequencing. Eight mutations consisting of missense, nonsense and frameshift mutations were found, together with a number of nucleotide polymorphisms. All the alterations in cell lines were heterozygous. Frequency of mutations was relatively high in prostate cancer (2/7 cell lines and 2/33 tumor specimens). We placed a mutant truncated MAD1L1, found in a lymphoma sample, into HOS, Ht161 and SJSA cell lines and found that it was less inhibitory than wild type MAD1L1 at decreasing cell proliferation. Co-expression experiments showed that the mutant form had a dominant-negative effect. Furthermore, this mutant impaired the mitotic checkpoint as shown by decreased mitotic indices in HOS cells expressing mutant MAD1L1 after culture with the microtubule-disrupting agent, nocodazole. Our results suggest a pathogenic role of MAD1L1 mutations in various types of human cancer."
11433521	"Karyotypic similarity identified by multiplex-FISH relates four prostate adenocarcinoma cell lines: PC-3, PPC-1, ALVA-31, and ALVA-41."	"Recently developed molecular cytogenetic techniques for karyotyping are providing new and important insights regarding the chromosomal changes that occur in solid tumors. We used multiplex-FISH to analyze four adenocarcinoma cell lines, PC-3, PPC-1, ALVA-31, and ALVA-41, in which the characterization of a large number of rearranged chromosomes was partially or substantially inconclusive by G-banding. Although the original descriptions of these lines depict them as distinct entities established from different patients, this study demonstrates that these four lines share numerous, highly rearranged chromosomes, strongly supporting the conclusion that they are derived from the same patient material. Our analysis indicates that PPC-1, ALVA-31, and ALVA-41 were derived from PC-3 through mechanisms involving clonal progression represented by sequential changes and clonal diversion represented by differing patterns of changes. Extensive cellular heterogeneity was detected in all four lines, and most rearrangements included segments derived from multiple chromosomes. Each line also showed a set of unique derivative chromosomes. However, a limited number of metaphase cells (approximately 10) was analyzed for each line, and numerous single-cell abnormalities were detected in all of them. Therefore, it is plausible that the number of clonal, shared, and/or unique rearrangements has been underestimated. These cell lines have been utilized as models for understanding the biology of prostate cancer and reportedly differ in their cell physiology. Rather than detracting from their value, a complete understanding of the interrelationships of these lines to one another may provide the opportunity to define the molecular changes that have led to their individual malignant phenotypes."
11433524	Defining a common region of deletion at 13q21 in human cancers.	"Previous molecular genetic analyses identified a region of deletion at 13q21 in a variety of human cancers, suggesting the existence of a tumor suppressor gene(s) at this locus. In our earlier study on prostate cancer, the region of deletion was confined to a 3.1 cM interval between D13S152 and D13S162. At present, however, no known gene located in this interval has been firmly implicated in cancer, and the region remains too large for gene identification. To fine-map the area of interest, we established a contig of bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC) clones, narrowed the region of deletion by loss of heterozygosity (LOH) and homozygosity-mapping-of-deletion (HOMOD) analyses in different types of cancers, and tested a candidate gene from the region for mutation and alteration of expression in prostate cancers. The contig consisted of 75 overlapping BAC clones. In addition to the generation of 47 new sequence-tagged-site (STS) markers from the ends of BAC inserts, 76 known STS and expressed sequence tag markers were mapped to the contig (25 kb per marker on average). The minimal region of deletion was further defined to be about 700 kb between markers D13S791 and D13S166 by LOH analysis of 42 cases of prostate cancer, and by HOMOD analysis of eight prostate cancer cell lines/xenografts and 49 cell lines from cancers of the breast, ovary, endometrium, and cervix, using 18 microsatellite markers encompassing the deletion region. A gene that is homologous to the WT1 tumor suppressor gene, AP-2rep (KLF12), was mapped in this region and was analyzed for its expression and genetic mutation. In addition to low levels of expression in both normal and neoplastic cells of the prostate, this gene did not have any mutations in a group of aggressive prostate cancers and cell lines/xenografts, as assessed by the methods of polymerase chain reaction-single strand conformational polymorphism analysis and direct sequencing. These studies suggest that a 700 kb interval at 13q21 harbors a tumor suppressor gene(s) that seems to be involved in multiple types of cancer, and that the AP-2rep gene is unlikely to be an important tumor suppressor gene in prostate cancer. The BAC contig and high-resolution physical map of the defined region of deletion should facilitate the cloning of a tumor suppressor gene(s) at 13q21."
11444857	DNA mismatch repair enzyme activity and gene expression in prostate cancer.	"Microsatellite instability (MSI) of short repetitive sequences in human chromosomal DNA can result from defective DNA mismatch repair function in tumor cells. We hypothesize that DNA mismatch repair (MMR) activity is down-regulated during prostatic carcinogenesis. To test this hypothesis, MMR activities and mismatch repair-related genes were analyzed in five different prostate cancer cell lines. Our results demonstrate that MMR activities were decreased as compared to MMR proficient HeLa cells. Interestingly, LNCaP, PC-3 and DU145 had much lower MMR activities as compared to DUPro and TSUPr1. The MMR-related genes (hMLH1, hPMS1, hPMS2, hMSH2, hMSH3, hMSH6) showed mRNA transcripts in all prostate cancer cell lines. However, Western blotting showed decreased or absent hMLH1 protein expression in PC-3, DU145, DUPro and TSUPr1 cells. Similarly, the hMSH2 protein expression was low or absent in DU145 and LNCaP cells. This is the first report that demonstrates decreased MMR activities is associated with low expression of hMLH1, hMSH2 and other MMR-related proteins in prostate cancer."
11485933	Clinical and experimental progression of a new model of human prostate cancer and therapeutic approach.	"We report the clinical evolution of a prostate cancer, metastasizing to lungs and bones, recurring locally, and escaping from anti-androgen therapy. Key event of biological progression of the patient's tumor was the coincidence of allelic imbalance accumulation and of bone metastases occurrence. The recurrent tumor was established as the transplantable xenograft PAC120 in nude mice, where it grew locally. PAC120 displayed the same immunophenotype of the original tumor (positive for keratin, vimentin, prostatic acid phosphatase, and Leu-7) and expressed human HOXB9, HOXA4, HER-2/neu, and prostate-specific antigen genes, as detected by reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction. It formed lung micrometastases detected by mRNA expression of human genes. Cytogenetic analysis demonstrated numerous alterations reflecting the tumor evolution. PAC120 was still hormone-dependent; its growth was strongly inhibited by the new gonadotropin-releasing hormone antagonist FE 200486 but weakly by gonadotropin-releasing hormone superagonist D-Trp(6)-luteinizing-hormone releasing hormone (decapeptyl). Tumor growth inhibition induced by anti-hormone therapy was linked to the hormone deprivation degree, more important and more stable with FE 200486 than with D-Trp(6)-luteinizing-hormone releasing hormone. Surgical castration of mice led to tumor regressions but did not prevent late recurrences. Transition to hormone-independent tumors was frequently associated with a mucoid differentiation or with a neuroendocrine-like pattern. Independent variations of mRNA expression of HER-2/neu and prostate-specific antigen were observed in hormone-independent tumors whereas HOXB9 gene expression was constant. In conclusion, PAC120 xenograft, a new model of hormone-dependent prostate cancer retained the progression potential of the original tumor, opening the opportunity to study the hormone dependence escape mechanism."
11488070	HER2 protein expression and gene amplification in androgen-independent prostate cancer.	"The role of the HER2 receptor remains uncertain in the pathogenesis and progression of human prostate cancer. Previous studies have reported widely divergent rates for HER2 expression in primary prostate tumors, probably owing to significant methodologic differences in the studies. Few data exist about the frequency of HER2 protein overexpression and gene amplification in androgen-independent prostate cancer (AIPC), although recent xenograft models suggest HER2 expression may be up-regulated in the transition from androgen-dependent to androgen-independent disease. We studied the role of HER2 protein in AIPC by immunohistochemical and fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) analyses on AIPC specimens using well-characterized and validated reagents. Fourteen (36%) of 39 specimens expressed HER2; however, only 2 (5%) had moderate (2+) expression, and 2 (5%) had high-level (3+) expression. Two (6%) of 36 specimens had gene amplification by FISH. These data suggest that HER2 protein overexpression and gene amplification are relatively uncommon in AIPC."
11522622	TSU-Pr1 and JCA-1 cells are derivatives of T24 bladder carcinoma cells and are not of prostatic origin.	"We have shown previously that the putative prostate carcinoma cell lines TSU-Pr1 and JCA-1 share a common origin. The observation that these cell lines have p53 and Ha-ras mutations identical to those in bladder carcinoma cell line T24 prompted us to investigate their possible interrelations. We used cytogenetics and DNA profiling to compare the genetic backgrounds of the three cell lines. At least 12 structural chromosomal abnormalities are shared between T24, TSU-Pr1, and JCA-1 cells. DNA profiles were identical for all three cell lines. These results clearly indicate that the cell lines TSU-Pr1 and JCA-1 are not of prostatic origin but are derivatives of the bladder carcinoma cell line T24. TSU-Pr1 and, to a lesser extent, JCA-1 are frequently used as models in prostate cancer research, and numerous publications have appeared based on these lines. Several other T24 cross-contaminants have been identified in the past, and some of these, such as ECV304, continue to be used under the wrong identity. Our findings highlight the insidious problem that can occur when information regarding cross-contamination does not reach individual researchers and/or the importance of the problem is not fully acknowledged."
11536304	Methylation and mutational analysis of p27(kip1) in prostate carcinoma.	"BACKGROUND: We have previously identified 12p12-13 as a region of frequent genetic loss in prostate carcinoma. A candidate tumor suppressor gene at this locus is the cyclin dependent kinase inhibitor p27(kip1), which has been implicated as a marker of aggressive prostate carcinoma. Herein, we examine metastatic prostate tumors, xenografts, and cell lines for gene inactivation via mutational inactivation or promoter hypermethylation. METHODS: Mutation analysis was performed on metastatic prostate tumors of 18 patients, eight prostate carcinoma cell lines, and 18 xenografts by PCR amplification of the entire open reading frame of p27(kip1). PCR products were sequenced directly using internal primers. Methylation analysis was performed on four cell lines and nine xenografts using direct sequencing of cloned PCR products of bisulfite treated DNA. Presence of a CpG was consistent with methylation of that cytosine in the original sample. RESULTS: With the exception of the previously reported homozygous deletion, no additional mutations were identified. Methylated CpG residues were identified in three xenografts (LuCAP23, LuCAP35, and PC82) and the methylated residues clustered at six sites; the cytosines 69, 149, 191, 286, 349, and 487 base pairs 5' of the ATG start codon. However, no sample demonstrated promotor methylation in all sequenced clones and the number of methylated base pairs ranged from seven to three, not the level usually associated with gene silencing. CONCLUSIONS: Mutational inactivation of p27(kip1) is a rare event in metastatic prostate carcinoma. While CpG methylation does occur, it is an infrequent event and does not appear to be the mechanism of p27(kip1) down regulation in prostate carcinoma."
11584064	Familial multiple myeloma: a family study and review of the literature.	"BACKGROUND: The etiology of multiple myeloma (MM) remains obscure, although reports of familial clustering have implicated both a host susceptibility factor and environmental effects. Here we describe the medical histories of members of a family prone to MM. METHODS: We developed a pedigree for an MM-prone family by using information obtained from a questionnaire. Protein immunoelectrophoresis of serum and urine from the proband and from 19 family members was performed to detect monoclonal immunoproteins. Peripheral blood obtained from the proband and from five relatives was subjected to standard cytogenetic studies to detect constitutional chromosomal abnormalities. Multifluor-fluorescence in situ hybridization (M-FISH) and standard FISH studies were performed on peripheral blood from the proband and from two other affected living relatives to determine their karyotypes and to detect clonal chromosomal abnormalities frequently seen in patients with MM. RESULTS: Within this family, a sibship of seven included three individuals (including the proband) with histologically verified MM and two individuals with a monoclonal gammopathy of unknown significance (MGUS), as determined by immunoelectrophoresis of serum and urine. This family also had members with acute lymphocytic leukemia, malignant melanoma, and prostate cancer. In the family members tested, we detected no constitutional chromosomal abnormality. None of the three individuals analyzed by FISH had a deletion of the retinoblastoma (Rb-1) locus, which is frequently deleted in patients with MM, and only one (the proband) had a translocation involving chromosomes 11 and 14, a clonal abnormality commonly seen in MM. CONCLUSION: The study of familial MM may provide insights into the pathogenesis and, ultimately, the control and prevention of MM and related disorders."
11586104	Early growth response-1 gene: potential radiation response gene marker in prostate cancer.	"This study was undertaken to determine whether the transcription factor EGR-1 expression: (1) in the primary tumor, correlates with radiation response in terms of complete local tumor control with no evidence of disease or recurrence and no evidence of metastasis; (2) in the postirradiated biopsies correlates with residual tumor; and (3) correlates with the expression of Egr-1 target genes such as TP53, pRB, and Bax. The authors analyzed: (1) 25 pretreated surgically resected paraffin-embedded primary adenocarcinomas of the prostate for the presence of EGR-1 expression and mutation, and correlated this with clinical endpoints such as serum prostate-specific antigen levels and current clinical status; (2) 27 postirradiated biopsies of prostate for the presence of EGR-1 expression, and correlated these findings to the residual tumor status; and (3) 12 prospective prostate tumor specimens for EGR-1 expression and its target genes. EGR-1 expression was determined by immunohistochemistry and mutations were screened in two regions of the Egr-1 gene (trinucleotide AGC repeats in transactivation domain [TD] and poly A tract in 3'UTR) by polymerase chain reaction-single strand conformational polymorphism analysis. Of 25 patients, 18 patients showed expression of EGR-1. EGR-1 overexpression correlated with treatment failure. No correlation with EGR-1 overexpression and its target genes was found, which may indirectly suggest that overexpressed EGR-1 may lack transactivation function. In summary, EGR-1 overexpression in the mutant form may provide an indication of clinical failure (local recurrence or metastasis)."
11588854	Hormones and prostate cancer: what's next?	"In summary, the hormonal hypothesis remains one of the most important hypotheses in prostate cancer etiology. Although epidemiologic data regarding the role of hormones are still inconclusive, there are many intriguing leads. Armed with more complete methodological data, state-of-the-art hormone assays, sound epidemiologic design, and a more thorough analytical approach, a new generation of studies should yield critical data and insights to help clarify further the role of hormones in prostate cancer. These new studies may determine ultimately whether racial/ethnic differences in hormonal levels and in genetic susceptibility to hormone-metabolizing genes can help explain the very large racial/ethnic differences in prostate cancer risk."
11595700	Allelic variants of aromatase and the androgen and estrogen receptors: toward a multigenic model of prostate cancer risk.	"PURPOSE: The purpose of this study was to determine whether polymorphisms in the CAG repeat in exon 1 of the androgen receptor (AR), two intronic restriction sites in the estrogen receptor (ESR1 XbaI and ESR1 PvuII), and an Arg264Cy5 substitution in the aromatase gene (CYP19) contribute to prostate cancer risk. EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: A case-control study was performed with 88 Caucasian prostate cancer patients and 241 Caucasian male controls. Logistic regression models were used to assess individual and joint contributions of genotypes to prostate cancer risk. RESULTS: For single polymorphisms, only the AR repeat number was significantly related to increased prostate cancer risk [age- and body mass index (BMI)-adjusted odds ratio (OR), 1.14; 95% confidence interval (CI), 1.04-1.25], suggesting a 14% increase in risk for each missing CAG repeat. When subjects were classified as either long (> or =23 AR CAG repeats) or short (<23 repeats) carriers, a significant increase in risk was also observed (age- and BMI-adjusted OR, 1.75; 95% CI, 1.05-2.95; P = 0.04). The aromatase C/T was associated with an increase in risk of borderline significance (age- and BMI-adjusted OR, 2.50; 95% CI, 0.99-6.28). When examining the effects of two polymorphisms on prostate cancer risk, homozygosity for the ESR1 XbaI restriction site together with a longer AR was more frequent among controls (32%) than cases (18%; age- and BMI-adjusted OR, 0.39; 95% CI, 0.19-0.78). The aromatase C/C genotype together with a longer AR was also more frequent among controls (55%) than cases (41%; age- and BMI-adjusted OR, 0.51; 95% CI, 0.30-0.89). CONCLUSIONS: Estrogen and aromatase may play a role in prostate cancer. A multigenic model of prostate cancer susceptibility is also supported."
11595707	Deletions on chromosome 8p22 may predict disease progression as well as pathological staging in prostate cancer.	"PURPOSE: A recent report demonstrated that the deletion of chromosome 8p22 could predict disease progression in stage III (capsular penetrating) prostate cancer. We studied if the status of chromosomal deletions of 8p22 could reflect pathological stage as well as patient prognosis, thereby serving as a diagnostic tool to optimize the treatment strategy in prostate cancer. EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: A total of 97 patients (41 Japanese and 56 Swedish) were studied by the fluorescence in situ hybridization technique. Seventy-seven patients (23 pT2, 18 pT3, and 36 pN+ tumors) underwent surgery (radical prostatectomy or lymph node dissection). The specimens were prepared by touch biopsy. From another 20 cases, fine-needle aspiration biopsies were obtained. RESULTS: 8p22 deletions were detected in 47 (61%) and 11 (55%) specimens of 77 touch biopsies and 20 fine-needle aspiration biopsies, respectively. No significant difference was found in the frequency of 8p22 deletion between different preparations of specimens, as well as between different races (Japanese versus Swedish). The frequency of 8p22 deletion was statistically higher in patients with pT3 or more than in those with pT2 (P < 0.01). Disease progression was evaluated in 57 patients. The Cox proportional hazards model revealed 8p22 deletion to be the strongest parameter to predict disease progression (hazards ratio = 5.75; P = 0.0001). CONCLUSIONS: Studies on chromosomal deletions of 8p22 by fluorescence in situ hybridization technique may serve as a genetic marker to optimize the treatment strategy in patients with prostate cancer to the optimal treatment."
11669308	Chronic eosinophilic leukemia with t(6;11)(q27;q23) translocation.	"We report a rare case of chronic eosinophilic leukemia (CEL) with a chromosomal abnormality of t(6;11)(q27;q23). The patient was diagnosed as having thyroid cancer with metastases to the lung and cervical lymph nodes in 1993. Percutaneous ethanol injection therapy (PEIT), total thyroidectomy, and radiotherapy were performed. The patient was also diagnosed as having prostatic cancer with bone metastasis in July 1999, and hormonal therapy was performed. At the time of the diagnosis of prostatic cancer, leukocytosis with eosinophilia was also revealed. Thereafter, cytogenetical analysis and reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) analysis of bone marrow showed t(6;11)(q27;q23) translocation and MLL/AF6 fusion products, respectively. No transcripts of the BCR/ABL chimeric gene were found by RT-PCR in bone marrow. Analysis of serum cytokines revealed a slight elevation of GM-CSF but no elevation of IL-3 or IL-5. Tissue damage due to infiltration of eosinophils was not observed throughout the clinical course. On the basis of the cytogenetic and molecular abnormality, the patient was diagnosed as having CEL, rather than reactive eosinophilia due to thyroid or prostatic cancer or other reactive inflammation. This is the first case report of CEL with t(6;11)(q27;q23) translocation."
11684838	Molecular biology of the androgen receptor: from molecular understanding to the clinic.	"The androgen receptor (AR) is the key regulatory element of androgen signaling in the cell. It mediates action of androgens and is therefore essential for growth, function and differentiation of the human male urogenital tract. Genetic alterations in the AR gene may cause impaired development resulting in androgen insensitivity syndromes (AIS) or in neurodegenerative diseases like Kennedy syndrome. Besides the crucial role in the process of virilization during embryogenesis and puberty, the AR also plays an important role in the adult man as the intracellular mediator of androgen action. Androgen withdrawal and/or AR blockade is the main choice of treatment of nonorgan-confined prostate cancer. Unfortunately, this treatment is only palliative and a majority of these tumors recur and progress to an androgen-independent and therapy-resistant stage. Recent findings gave new insight into the molecular structure and function of the AR and improved our understanding about prostate cancer progression, consequently resulting in the development of novel treatments. It has become evident that the AR is a nuclear transcription factor that can be activated ligand-dependently by androgens as well as ligand-independently by other hormones and various growth factors, respectively. Moreover, it was shown that the interaction of the AR with other proteins of the intracellular signal transduction cascade may promote prostate tumor growth. This review will summarize the most important findings about the AR and the androgen signaling pathway to improve the understanding of prostate diseases and novel treatment strategies that may be useful in the clinic."
11696420	"Myopodin, a synaptopodin homologue, is frequently deleted in invasive prostate cancers."	"Prostate cancer is one of the leading causes of cancer-related deaths for men in the United States. Like other malignancies, prostate cancer is underscored by a variety of aberrant genetic alterations during its development. Although loss of heterozygosity or allelic loss is frequently identified among prostate cancers, few genes have been identified thus far as critical to the development of invasive prostate cancers. In this report, we used the recently developed technology, the ""differential subtraction chain,"" to perform a genome-wide search for sequences that are deleted in an aggressive prostate cancer. Among the deleted sequences, we found that one sequence was deleted in >50% of prostate cancers we tested. We mapped this sequence to chromosome 4q25 by screening the Genebridge 4 hamster radiation panel with primers specific to this probe, and subsequently identify a 54-kb minimal common deletion region that contains the sequence encoding myopodin. Sequence analysis indicates that myopodin shares significant homology with synaptopodin, a protein closely associated with podocyte and neuron differentiation. Further study shows that frequent complete or partial deletions of the myopodin gene occurred among invasive prostate cancer cases (25 of 31 cases, or 80%). Statistical analysis indicates that deletion of myopodin is highly correlated with the invasiveness of prostate cancers, and thus may hold promise as an important prognostic marker for prostate cancers."
11705864	Association of E-cadherin germ-line alterations with prostate cancer.	"In our recent cancer registry-based study, the incidence of gastric carcinoma was increased up to 5-fold in male relatives of early-onset prostate cancer (PCA) patients. This association may reflect the influence of genetic factors predisposing individuals to both tumor types. Germ-line mutations of the CDH1 gene at 16q have recently been associated with familial gastric cancer. Furthermore, two genome-wide linkage studies of PCA recently reported positivity at 16q. We therefore identified families and individual patients with both gastric and PCA and investigated whether the CDH1 gene mutations were involved in cancer predisposition in these cases. Fifteen of the 180 Finnish hereditary PCA families (8.3%) had one or more gastric cancer cases. No truncating or splice site CDH1 mutations were identified by PCR single-strand conformational polymorphism in these families or in eight individual patients who had both prostate and gastric cancer. However, a novel S270A missense mutation in exon 6 of the CDH1 gene was seen in a single family with four prostate and two gastric cancers. A large-scale population-based survey indicated a higher prevalence of S270A among both familial PCA cases (3.3%; n = 120; P = 0.01) and unselected PCA patients (1.5%; n = 472; P = 0.12) as compared with blood donors serving as population controls (0.5%; n = 923). We conclude that individual rare mutations and polymorphisms in the CDH1 gene, such as S270A, may contribute to the onset of PCA and warrant further investigations in other populations. However, the CDH1 gene does not appear to explain the link between prostate and gastric cancer."
11705865	Decreased androgen-responsive growth of human prostate cancer is associated with increased genetic alterations.	"Genetic mechanisms involved in prostate tumor progression from the androgen-responsive to androgen-unresponsive stage are not well understood because of the tremendous heterogeneity in the tumor as well as the lack of suitable models. Using 165 repeat microsatellite DNA markers distributed equally over all of the chromosomes, we determined an association between genetic alterations and androgen-unresponsive growth in three stages of LNCaP cell model (C33: early, androgen-responsive; C51: mid, decreased androgen-responsive; and C81: late, androgen-unresponsive and increased tumorigenicity). Furthermore, the genetic alterations were confirmed in laser microdissected normal and cancerous tissues from 15 clinical samples of human prostatic adenocarcinomas using selected markers. A stem-line karyotype analysis exhibited an identical chromosomal pattern in both C33 and C81 stage cells except for the structural rearrangements of chromosome 3 and a gain of one copy of the Y chromosome in the androgen-unresponsive C81 stage cells. Nine microsatellite DNA markers on seven different chromosomes (1, 4, 5, 11, 17, 18, and 19) showed microsatellite instability (MSI) in both C51 and C81 stage cells. Additionally, 23 markers on 15 different chromosomes revealed MSI in C81 cells. Chromosomal regions demonstrating allelic loss (AL) include 1q, 3p, 5p, 8q, 9q, and 13q in C51 and C81 cells. In clinical human specimens, MSI was observed on chromosomes 1 (20%), 5 (23%), 17 (40%), and 19 (36%), whereas ALs were found 40% on chromosomal region 1q, 20% on 3p, 26% on 5p and 8q, and 33% on 13q. In conclusion, the LNCaP cell model showed the increasing number of genetic changes including MSI and AL. These increased genetic alterations may be associated with the development of the androgen-unresponsive phenotype."
11712084	Early reduction in the aneuploidy at chromosomes 7 and 8 are significantly correlated with clinical effect in high-dose rate brachytherapy with external beam radiotherapy in localized prostate cancer.	"Although reduction in the serum prostate specific antigen (PSA) correlates with clinical outcome for high dose rate Iridium-192 (HDR Ir-192) brachytherapy, it takes a long latency period. We investigated numerical chromosome changes of prostatic cancer during the pre- and post-treatment periods of HDR Ir-192 brachytherapy (and external beam radiotherapy), using fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) to clear the effect of treatment in early phase. Transitional changes in the frequency of aneuploidy for chromosomes 7, 8, 10, 12, 16, X, and Y in prostate cancer during the pre- and post-treatment periods were observed. Gains of chromosomes 7, 8 and 12 were noted in the pre-treatment samples (4 out of 12 cases in chromosomes 7 and 8; 1 out of 12 cases in chromosome 12), while a notable reduction in the number of cells with extra copies of these chromosomes was observed in post-treatment specimens. This change appears earlier than the reduction in the value of prostate specific antigen (PSA) and strongly reflects the effect of HDR brachytherapy with external beam radiotherapy in localized prostate cancer. Decrease in the number of cells with high ploidies of chromosomes 7, 8 and 12 at 12 weeks after treatment may predict clinical effects of radiation therapy, which may explain the radiation dependency of localized prostate cancer cells."
11712818	Inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) expression and its prognostic value in prostate cancer.	"OBJECTIVES: The expression of inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) was evaluated in prostate cancer and the results were compared with other prognostic factors and patients outcome. MATERIALS AND METHODS: Clinical and histopathological data and follow-up information of 198 prostate cancer (PC) patients treated between the years 1973 and 1992 at Kuopio University Hospital, Finland were collected from patient files. Archival tumor specimens were used for immunohistochemical analysis of iNOS. The expression of iNOS was analysed by light microscopy and the expression was scored into 3 grades (negative weak or strong). RESULTS: iNOS was expressed in tumor cells and in inflammatory cells inside and around the tumor. Normal and hyperplastic prostate tissues adjacent to tumors were negative or weakly positive for iNOS. The strong iNOS expression in tumor cells was related to high T-classification (p=0.001), metastasis (p=0.06), high Gleason score (p=0.0004), DNA aneuploidy (p=0.0001) and perineural infiltration (p=0.0001). iNOS expression was not linked with the density of tumor infiltrating lymphocytes or the expression of p53. The mean values of Ki-67, mitotic index and S-phase fraction were higher in tumors strongly expressing iNOS. In univariate survival analysis the strong expression of iNOS was a significant predictor of poor survival in the entire cohort (p=0.0002) and in the MO patients (p=0.008), but was not an independent predictor of survival in Cox's multivariate analysis. CONCLUSION: iNOS has been related to stimulative and suppressive effects on cancer cell growth, but the prognostic value of iNOS has not been previously studied in PC. Here we could demonstrate an association between strong iNOS expression and rapid cancer cell proliferation rate, dedifferentiation and advanced stage cancer. The strong iNOS expression was a predictor of poor survival in univariate analysis, but was inferior to established prognostic factors in multivariate analysis."
11713582	Identification of the prostate cancer micro-foci with chromosome 8p deletion at the tumor interface area by histopathological-FISH parallel examination.	"We used a histopathological-fluorescence in situ hybridization (histo-FISH) parallel examination technique to identify the micro-foci of prostate cancer with chromosome 8p deletion at the interface area adjacent to the tumor. The archival paraffin embedded prostate tissue sections from 27 prostate cancer patients were evaluated. Seventy-eight percent of the patients showed chromosome 8p deletion in the tumor sections. Eight of the 27 patients (30%) had been found positive for tumor micro-foci with chromosome 8p deletion at the tumor interface area. There is a strong trend for patients with late stage tumors to have positive findings for tumor micro-foci at the interface area (p<0.002). Our data suggests that the formation of tumor micro-foci with chromosome 8p deletion and ploidy change at the interface area is a significant development in the advanced prostate cancer, and identification of these micro-foci may serve as a prognostic parameter in the clinical assessment of prostate cancer patients."
11715465	[Expression of tumor metastasis suppressor gene KAI1/CD82 in human cancer cell lines with different metastasis potential]	"OBJECTIVE: To investigate the correlation of a newly-defined tumor metastasis suppressor gene KAI1/CD82 and metastatic potential of human cancer cell lines. METHODS: Expressions of KAI1/CD82 in eight human cancer cell lines of prostate, lung and melanoma with different metastasis potential were studied by Northern blot hybridization and the mutation were detected by PCR-SSCP. RESULTS: Expressions of KAI1 mRNA decreased in human prostate cancer cell lines PC3 and PC3M, and lung cancer cell line PG which were metastatic cancer cell lines (integral light density values: 0.0319, 0.0266 and 0.0549, respectively). Expression of KAI1 mRNA showed high level in PAa, a human lung cancer cell line with no metastasis (integral light density value: 0.7313). In human melanoma cell lines with different metastasis potential (WM35, WM1341b, WM983a and WM451), expression of KAI1 showed moderate expression (integral light density values are 0.1798, 0.1582, 0.1501, 0.1800 respectively). PCR-SSCP analysis indicated the existence of band shift in exon 7 of KAI1 gene in PC3, PG and PC3M. CONCLUSION: Decreased KAI1/CD82 expression may be associated with enhanced metastatic potential in prostate cancer cell lines and lung cancer cell line other than melanoma cell lines. The decreased expression may be partially nelaled with mutation of KAI1 gene."
11723237	Inhibition of potentially anti-apoptotic proteins by antisense protein kinase C-alpha (Isis 3521) and antisense bcl-2 (G3139) phosphorothioate oligodeoxynucleotides: relationship to the decreased viability of T24 bladder and PC3 prostate cancer cells.	"Isis 3521 and G3139 are 20- and 18-mer phosphorothioate oligonucleotides, respectively, targeted to the protein kinase C (PKC)-alpha and bcl-2 mRNAs. Treatment of T24 bladder and PC3 prostate carcinoma cells with full-length and 3'-truncation mutants of Isis 3521 causes down-regulation of PKC-alpha protein and mRNA. However, at the level of a 15-mer and shorter, down-regulation of mRNA expression is no longer observed. Further, no diminution in cellular viability, as measured by 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)2,5-diphenyl tetrazolium bromide assay, in response to increasing concentrations of paclitaxel, can be observed for these shorter oligomers. These observations not only indicate that PKC-alpha protein expression can be down-regulated by both RNase H-dependent and -independent mechanisms but also that down-regulation of PKC-alpha is insufficient by itself to ""chemosensitize"" cells. G3139, which down-regulates bcl-2 protein and mRNA expression, also down-regulates PKC-alpha protein and mRNA expression but not that of PKC-betaI, -epsilon, or -zeta. However, the down-regulation of PKC-alpha and bcl-2 are not linked. When the carrier Eufectin 5 is employed, only bcl-2 is down-regulated in both T24 and PC3 cells at 50 nM oligonucleotide concentration. At 100 nM, both bcl-2 and PKC-alpha expression are down-regulated, and only at this concentration can ""chemosensitization"" to paclitaxel and carboplatin be observed. In contrast, the down-regulation of bcl-2 seems to be linked with that of RelA (p65). However, this too is also not sufficient for chemosensitization, even though it leads to the loss of expression of genes under the putative control of nuclear factor-kappaB and to detachment of the cells from plastic surfaces. These results underscore the complexity of the intracellular requirements for the initiation of chemosensitization to anti-neoplastic agents."
11724291	LOH analyses in the region of the putative tumour suppressor gene C13 on chromosome 13q13.	"BACKGROUND: In previous studies we isolated a new cDNA fragment named C13 which is down-regulated in malignant prostate tissues. The corresponding gene is localized on chromosome 13q13 between the known tumour suppressor genes (TSG) BRCA-2 and RB-1. MATERIALS AND METHODS: Loss of heterozygosity (LOH) analyses were carried out in the region of C13 in order to investigate the importance of the new putative TSG for prostate cancer development. Using semiquantitative LOH analysis, we screened 21 prostate carcinoma patients of different tumour stages (pT2-pT4) for 14 microsatellite markers in the region of C13 (13q13) and in the flanking BRCA-2 and the RB-1 loci. RESULTS: For 18 (86%) patients LOH or allelic imbalances were found. We identified three to nine alterations in affected tumours per marker. An overall genetic alteration frequency per patient of 38% (86 of 225 informative cases) could be calculated. One important finding regarding the overall frequency of determined microsatellite instability is that the LOH/AI rate of 47% for the seven C13-associated markers was higher than for the four markers of the RB-1 locus (39%) and for the three BRCA-2 markers (25%). Surprisingly, defining LOH critical regions (LCR) for the investigated marker panel, eight of the ten affected LCR cases showed chromosomal imbalances simultaneously for the RB-1 and the C13 LOH markers. CONCLUSIONS: The high LOH rate for eight different microsatellite markers in and around the putative TSG locus C13 on chromosome 13q13 further supports an involvement of C13 in prostate tumourigenesis."
11726203	Differential expression of estrogen receptor beta (ERbeta) and its C-terminal truncated splice variant ERbetacx as prognostic predictors in human prostatic cancer.	"Estrogens have been widely used for the treatment of advanced prostatic adenocarcinoma. However, their direct effect to prostatic cancer cells via estrogen receptors remains unclear. We investigated expression of ERalpha, wild-type ERbeta (wtERbeta), and a C-terminal truncated splice variant of ERbeta (ERbetacx) in 50 benign and 100 malignant human prostatic tissue samples by immunohistochemistry. While strong immunostaining of ERalpha was consistently identified in the stromal compartment, wtERbeta was expressed in epithelial cells in both the benign and malignant foci. However, wtERbeta expression was significantly lower in the cancers than in the benign epithelium and inversely correlated with Gleason tumor grade (P < 0.0001 and P = 0.0099, respectively). In contrast, ERbetacx was significantly more expressed in the high-grade cancers (83%) compared with the low-grade tumors (22%) and the benign sites (11%) (P < 0.0001, both). Cancer-specific survival of patients with lower wtERbeta expression was significantly worse than those with higher expression of wtERbeta (P = 0.0018). Conversely, higher ERbetacx expression significantly correlated with poor cancer-specific survival (P = 0.0058). These results suggest that differential expressions of wtERbeta and ERbetacx may be prognostic predictors for prostatic cancer."
11733359	Amplification of EIF3S3 gene is associated with advanced stage in prostate cancer.	"Gain of the long arm of chromosome 8 (8q) is one of the most common gains found in the advanced prostate cancer by comparative genomic hybridization. We have previously identified a putative target gene for the 8q gain, EIF3S3, that encodes a p40 subunit of eukaryotic translation initiation factor 3 (eIF3). Here, we studied the frequency of the EIF3S3 amplification in different stages of prostate cancer and co-amplification of EIF3S3 and oncogene MYC. In addition, prognostic utility of the EIF3S3 copy number alteration was evaluated. The analyses were done with fluorescence in situ hybridization and tissue microarray technology. High-level amplification of EIF3S3 was found in 11 of 125 (9%) of pT1/pT2 tumors, 12 of 44 (27%) of pT3/pT4 tumors, and 8 of 37 (22%) of lymph node metastases as well as in 26 of 78 (33%) and 15 of 30 (50%) of hormone refractory locally recurrent tumors and metastases, respectively. The amplification was associated with high Gleason score (P < 0.001). One of the 79 tumors with EIF3S3 amplification had only two copies of MYC, whereas all tumors with amplification of MYC had also amplification of EIF3S3 indicating common co-amplification of the genes. Gain of EIF3S3 was associated with poor cancer-specific survival in incidentally found prostate carcinomas (P = 0.023). In the analyses of prostatectomy-treated patients, the amplification was not statistically significantly associated with progression-free time. In conclusion, amplification of EIF3S3 gene is common in late-stage prostate cancer suggesting that it may be functionally involved in the progression of the disease."
11742035	Androgen receptor alterations in prostate cancer relapsed during a combined androgen blockade by orchiectomy and bicalutamide.	"Mechanisms of prostate cancer (CaP) recurrence during a combined androgen blockade (CAB) are poorly understood. Previously, the role of androgen receptor (AR) gene mutations underlying the CAB therapy relapse has been raised. To investigate the hypothesis that AR gene aberrations are involved in CAB relapse, 11 locally recurrent CaP samples from patients treated with orchiectomy and bicalutamide were analyzed for copy number changes and DNA sequence alterations of the AR gene by fluorescence in situ hybridization and single-strand conformation polymorphism, respectively. Altogether, base changes were detected in four tumors (36%). Three of them were missense mutations (G166S, W741C, M749I) and two were silent polymorphisms. Interestingly, none of the tumors had AR amplification. These data suggest that different AR variants are developed and selected for during various types of hormonal treatments, and also, that CAB achieved by orchiectomy and bicalutamide does not act as a selective force for AR amplification."
11743048	"p53 Alteration and chromosomal instability in prostatic high-grade intraepithelial neoplasia and concurrent carcinoma: analysis by immunohistochemistry, interphase in situ hybridization, and sequencing of laser-captured microdissected specimens."	"p53 mutation has been shown to be associated with chromosomal instability (CI) in many human dysplastic and neoplastic lesions. However, the precise role of p53 in the pathogenesis of prostate carcinoma (Pca) is unknown. Topographic analysis of p53 alteration using immunohistochemistry (IHC) was performed on 35 archived prostatectomy specimens containing Pca foci; high-grade prostate intraepithelial neoplasia (HPIN) foci intermingled with cancer (HPINI) and situated away (HPINA). Specimens from 2 patients were topographically genotyped using laser capture microdissection, PCR amplification, and direct sequencing of p53 exons 5-9. CI was evaluated in the same tissue foci by interphase in situ hybridization (IFISH) using centromere probes for chromosomes 7, 8, and Y. p53 immunoreactivity was found in 20%, 17%, 0, and 0 in Pca, HPINI, HPINA, and benign epithelium, respectively. p53 molecular analysis in the specimens examined confirmed the IHC findings. IFISH revealed numerical chromosomal alterations in keeping with CI in 71% and 25% of p53+ and p53- Pca, respectively (P =.1), 67% and 0 of p53+ and p53- HPIN, respectively (P <.02), and in 27% and 0 of HPINI and HPINA, respectively. We concluded that p53 mutation is an early change in at least a subset of Pca. HPINI foci tend to have higher overall p53 immunoreactivity and CI than HPINA. The presence of p53 mutation in HPIN was associated with the presence of CI as determined by IFISH. Our study also provided additional evidence in support of the concept that HPIN might be the earliest precursor of cancer. Furthermore, our studies identify genomic similarities in HPINI and Pca, implying that carcinoma may arise from progression of certain HPIN foci that most likely harbor p53 mutation and/or more CI."
11745418	Molecular disorders in transitional vs. peripheral zone prostate adenocarcinoma.	"Loss of heterozygosity (LOH) and microsatellite instability (MSI) have been shown to be mechanisms for tumor-suppressor gene inactivation in human oncogenesis. In our study, we examined LOH and MSI using 16 polymorphic markers of DNA for chromosomes 1, 3, 7, 8, 10 and 11. Microdissected tumor samples were isolated from 32 patients, representing 11 foci of incidentally discovered prostate cancer of the transitional zone (TZ), 12 prostate cancer of the peripheral zone (PZ) and 10 of high-grade PIN. We found loss of heterozygosity in the TZ group in 91% of informative cases (10/11) with al least 1 marker compared to 58% of cases (7/12) in PZ group and 70% of cases (7/10) in the HGPIN group. Chromosome 7 showed the highest rate of allelic loss in all 3 categories, with loss of 43% of loci in PIN, 37% in TZ tumors and 31% in PZ tumors. At chromosome 11, LOH was detected in 26% of loci in the TZ group, in 7% of loci in the PZ group and in 13% of loci in the PIN group. On chromosome 8, the PZ and HGPIN group showed allelic loss in 22% and 21% of loci, respectively, compared to 10% detected in the TZ group. The TZ group showed a significant higher rate of allelic instability compared to that observed in tumor samples from the peripheral zone: 73% of cases (8/11) showed genetic alterations (RER+ phenotype) in at least 4 loci analyzed compared to 8% and 10% in the PZ and HGPIN groups, respectively (p = 0.0006). These data suggest that transitional zone carcinoma and peripheral zone carcinoma display distinct and specific genetic alterations in different chromosomes. This diversity may help explain biologic and clinical differences between carcinomas arising in these distinct zones of the prostate. Also our results strongly suggest that the RER+ mutator phenotype could be linked to early development of transitional zone prostate carcinoma."
11745419	Regulation of u-PA gene expression in human prostate cancer.	"u-PA contributes to CaP progression, especially in the metastatic androgen-insensitive state. In vitro, u-PA is expressed by androgen-insensitive, but not androgen-sensitive, CaP cell lines. We hypothesized that in androgen-sensitive CaP an activated ARE represses u-PA expression but in androgen-insensitive CaP this repression is lost and u-PA is upregulated through MAP kinase signaling pathways. To determine whether binding of the DHT-AR complex to AREs in the u-PA promoter region represses u-PA transcription in androgen-sensitive CaP, we studied 2 PC3 androgen-insensitive human CaP cell lines stably transfected with AR [PC3(AR)(2) and PC3(AR)(13)] and 1 mock-transfected cell line [PC3(M)]. In the presence of the synthetic androgen mibolerone, both PC3(AR)(2) and PC3(AR)(13), but not PC3(M), cells showed decreased u-PA expression as assayed by Western and Northern blotting. The AR inhibitor flutamide abrogated mibolerone's effect. Androgen regulation of a second gene, PSA, was also demonstrated in the PC3(AR)(2) cell line. To explore the pathway stimulating u-PA expression in CaP, we performed transient transfections in PC3(AR)(2) cells using u-PA promoter-regulated CAT reporter constructs. Compared to full-length u-PA promoter-CAT constructs, either deletion or mutation of the 5' AP-1 or PEA3 site reduced CAT expression. The location of androgen responsiveness in the u-PA promoter was not identified through the combination of promoter search and transient transfection assays, indicating that a more complicated mechanism is involved in the AR-mediated downmodulation of u-PA expression."
11751389	Glucocorticoids manifest androgenic activity in a cell line derived from a metastatic prostate cancer.	"The pathophysiological mechanism(s) by which androgen independence develops in prostate cancer remains to be determined. The identification in many prostate cancer specimens of a mutant androgen receptor, T877A, with altered ligand specificity has provided an explanation for some treatment failures. The T877A mutant androgen receptor recognizes a number of nonandrogenic compounds, including certain estrogens, progestins, and even antiandrogens as androgens. However, a comprehensive screen for hormonal agents which display agonist activity on this mutant has not been performed. In this study, we characterized this clinically important receptor mutant further and found that it can be activated by a wide range of compounds, including a number of endogenous glucocorticoids. Among the most clinically relevant compounds identified are DOC and corticosterone, both of which can effectively activate the mutant receptor at concentrations normally found in blood. Dexamethasone, a synthetic glucocorticoid frequently used in various contexts for prostate cancer therapy, is also recognized as an androgen by the mutant receptor. These unexpected findings suggest the need to: (a) reassess the role of adrenally derived glucocorticoids in prostate cancer disease progression; and (b) recognize the potential for iatrogenic stimulation of disease progression with certain glucocorticoid interventions."
11752579	"KLF6, a candidate tumor suppressor gene mutated in prostate cancer."	"Kruppel-like factor 6 (KLF6) is a zinc finger transcription factor of unknown function. Here, we show that the KLF6 gene is mutated in a subset of human prostate cancer. Loss-of-heterozygosity analysis revealed that one KLF6 allele is deleted in 77% (17 of 22) of primary prostate tumors. Sequence analysis of the retained KLF6 allele revealed mutations in 71% of these tumors. Functional studies confirm that whereas wild-type KLF6 up-regulates p21 (WAF1/CIP1) in a p53-independent manner and significantly reduces cell proliferation, tumor-derived KLF6 mutants do not. Our data suggest that KLF6 is a tumor suppressor gene involved in human prostate cancer."
11773980	Simultaneous inhibition of Rac1 and IKK pathways sensitizes lung cancer cells to TNFalpha-mediated apoptosis.	"Lung cancer is the most frequently occurring cancer in the world and causes more deaths in the United States than does colon, breast, and prostate cancer combined. Despite advances in treatment modalities including radiation, surgery, and chemotherapy, the overall survival in lung cancer remains low. The cytokine tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNFalpha) has been shown to regulate both apoptotic and antiapoptotic pathways. Activation of the transcription factor NF-kappaB appears to be the critical determinant of the antiapoptotic response to TNFalpha exposure in epithelial cells. A549 human lung carcinoma cells were infected with adenoviral constructs carrying dominant negative mutants of Rac1 and IKK or constitutively active mutant of Rac1, upstream effectors in TNF-mediated NF-kappaB activation. Cell death, apoptosis, and NF-kappaB activation were subsequently measured in response to TNFalpha exposure. Although TNFalpha alone had no cytotoxic effect, the expression of the dominant negative mutant of IKKbeta (Ad.IKKbetaKA) resulted in apoptotic cell death following TNFalpha exposure. Similarly, dominant negative mutant to Rac1 (Ad.N17Rac1) further sensitized A549 cells to IKKbetaKA-mediated TNFalpha-induced cell death. Conversely, a dominant active form of Rac1 (Ad.V12Rac1) ameliorated the cell death response to concurrent IKKbeta dominant negative mutant infection and TNFalpha exposure. These results suggest that concurrent inhibition of Rac1 and IKK pathways sensitizes lung cancer cells to TNFalpha-induced apoptosis."
11784719	Insulin-like growth factor (IGF)-binding protein-3 mutants that do not bind IGF-I or IGF-II stimulate apoptosis in human prostate cancer cells.	"Insulin-like growth factor (IGF)-binding protein-3 (IGFBP-3) can stimulate apoptosis and inhibit cell proliferation directly and independently of binding IGFs or indirectly by forming complexes with IGF-I and IGF-II that prevent them from activating the IGF-I receptor to stimulate cell survival and proliferation. To date, IGF-independent actions only have been demonstrated in a limited number of cells that do not synthesize or respond to IGFs. To assess the general importance of IGF-independent mechanisms, we have generated human IGFBP-3 mutants that cannot bind IGF-I or IGF-II by substituting alanine for six residues in the proposed IGF binding site, Ile(56)/Tyr(57)/Arg(75)/Leu(77)/Leu(80)/Leu(81), and expressing the 6m-hIGFBP-3 mutant construct in Chinese hamster ovary cells. Binding of both IGF-I and IGF-II to 6m-hIGFBP-3 was reduced >80-fold. The nonbinding 6m-hIGFBP-3 mutant still was able to inhibit DNA synthesis in a mink lung epithelial cell line in which inhibition by wild-type hIGFBP-3 previously had been shown to be exclusively IGF-independent. 6m-hIGFBP-3 only can act by IGF-independent mechanisms since it is unable to form complexes with the IGFs that inhibit their action. We next compared the ability of wild-type and 6m-hIGFBP-3 to stimulate apoptosis in serum-deprived PC-3 human prostate cancer cells. PC-3 cells are known to synthesize and respond to IGF-II, so that IGFBP-3 could potentially act by either IGF-dependent or IGF-independent mechanisms. In fact, 6m-hIGFBP-3 stimulated PC-3 cell death and stimulated apoptosis-induced DNA fragmentation to the same extent and with the same concentration dependence as wild-type hIGFBP-3. These results indicate that IGF-independent mechanisms are major contributors to IGFBP-3-induced apoptosis in PC-3 cells and may play a wider role in the antiproliferative and antitumorigenic actions of IGFBP-3."
11790857	Cluster analysis of comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) data using self-organizing maps: application to prostate carcinomas.	"Comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) is a modern genetic method which enables a genome-wide survey of chromosomal imbalances. For each chromosome region, one obtains the information whether there is a loss or gain of genetic material, or whether there is no change at that region. Usually it is not possible to evaluate all 46 chromosomes of a metaphase, therefore several (up to 20 or more) metaphases are analyzed per individual, and expressed as average. Mostly one does not study one individual alone but groups of 20-30 individuals. Therefore, large amounts of data quickly accumulate which must be put into a logical order. In this paper we present the application of a self-organizing map (Genecluster) as a tool for cluster analysis of data from pT2N0 prostate cancer cases studied by CGH. Self-organizing maps are artificial neural networks with the capability to form clusters on the basis of an unsupervised learning rule, i.e., in our examples it gets the CGH data as only information (no clinical data). We studied a group of 40 recent cases without follow-up, an older group of 20 cases with follow-up, and the data set obtained by pooling both groups. In all groups good clusterings were found in the sense that clinically similar cases were placed into the same clusters on the basis of the genetic information only. The data indicate that losses on chromosome arms 6q, 8p and 13q are all frequent in pT2N0 prostatic cancer, but the loss on 8p has probably the largest prognostic importance."
11793446	Determination of a minimal deletion interval on chromosome band 8p21 in sporadic prostate cancer.	"Loss of the short arm of chromosome 8 is a common event in prostatic neoplasms. Previous studies indicate that there may be up to three separate tumor suppressor genes on chromosome arm 8p, based on patterns of allelic loss. The responsible gene or genes have yet to be identified. In the present study, we used laser-capture microdissection of primary human prostate tumors and 17 microsatellite markers across chromosome band 8p21 to determine a minimal deletion interval. From an initial set of 120 cases, three tumors contained overlapping interstitial deletions on chromosome band 8p21. The three cases define an internally consistent minimal candidate tumor suppressor gene interval of approximately two megabases."
11825111	Identification of numerical chromosomal changes detected by interphase fluorescence in situ hybridization in high-grade prostate intraepithelial neoplasia as a predictor of carcinoma.	"CONTEXT: High-grade prostate intraepithelial neoplasia (HPIN) is the most likely precursor of prostate cancer. The condition of many patients with a diagnosis of HPIN in prostate needle core biopsy could, if left untreated, progress to invasive cancer. Currently there is no available clinical, immunohistochemical, or morphologic criteria that are predictive of this progression. OBJECTIVE: To determine whether chromosomal instability in these precursor lesions could increase their predictive value for cancer detection. DESIGN: Dual-color interphase fluorescence in situ hybridization analysis was performed on archived prostate needle core biopsies from 54 patients with initial diagnosis of isolated HPIN and follow-up of 3 years or more. We used commercially available centromere probes for chromosomes 4, 7, 8, and 10. We had interpretable results in 44 patients as follows: (1) group A: 24 HPIN patients with persistent HPIN and/or benign lesions in the follow-up biopsies, and (2) group B: 20 HPIN patients with progression to prostate carcinoma. RESULTS: Twenty-five percent of the patients in group B displayed numeric chromosomal aberrations. Only 8.3% of the patients from group A had chromosomal abnormalities (P =.1). The observed overall chromosomal changes in HPIN were higher than those in normal or hyperplastic epithelium, with a statistically significant difference (P <.05). All aberrations were detected in the form of chromosomal gain. Overall, the commonest aberration was gain of chromosome 8, followed by gains of chromosomes 7 and 10. CONCLUSION: These results indicated that although no single numeric chromosomal abnormality could be assigned as a predictor of HPIN progression to carcinoma, the overall level of numeric chromosomal abnormalities shows a trend of elevation in HPIN patients whose condition subsequently progressed to carcinoma."
11839815	Conditional loss of Nkx3.1 in adult mice induces prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia.	"The homeodomain-containing transcription factor NKX3.1 is a putative prostate tumor suppressor that is expressed in a largely prostate-specific and androgen-regulated manner. Loss of NKX3.1 protein expression is common in human prostate carcinomas and prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia (PIN) lesions and correlates with tumor progression. Disruption of the murine Nkx3.1 gene results in defects in prostate branching morphogenesis, secretions, and growth. To more closely mimic the pattern of NKX3.1 loss that occurs in human prostate tumors, we have used Cre- and loxP-mediated recombination to delete the Nkx3.1 gene in the prostates of adult transgenic mice. Conditional deletion of one or both alleles of Nkx3.1 leads to the development of preinvasive lesions that resemble PIN. The pattern of expression of several biomarkers (Ki-67, E-cadherin, and high-molecular-weight cytokeratins) in these PIN lesions resembled that observed in human cases of PIN. Furthermore, PIN foci in mice with conditional deletion of a single Nkx3.1 allele lose expression of the wild-type allele. Our results support the role of NKX3.1 as a prostate tumor suppressor and indicate a role for this gene in tumor initiation."
11863411	Molecular engineering of a two-step transcription amplification (TSTA) system for transgene delivery in prostate cancer.	"Gene therapy is founded on the concept that tissue-specific promoters can express heterologous genes for molecular imaging or therapeutic applications. The engineering of cell-specific enhancers to improve potency and the development of two-step transcriptional activation (TSTA) approaches have significantly improved the efficacy of transgene expression. Here we combine these technologies to create a robust, titratable, androgen-responsive system targeted to prostate cancer cells. Our ""chimeric"" TSTA system uses a duplicated variant of the prostate-specific antigen (PSA) gene enhancer to express GAL4 derivatives fused to one, two, or four VP16 activation domains. We targeted the resulting activators to cells with reporter templates bearing one, two, or five GAL4 binding sites upstream of firefly luciferase. We monitored activity via firefly luciferase assays in transfected cell extracts and in live nude mice using a cooled charge-coupled device (CCD) imaging system. In this system, we found that firefly luciferase expression in prostate cancer cells can be varied over an 800-fold range. We also found that a single plasmid bearing the optimized enhancer, GAL4-VP16 derivative, and reporter expressed firefly luciferase at 20-fold higher levels than the cytomegalovirus enhancer. We discuss the implications of this strategy and its application to molecular imaging and therapy."
11865006	Her-2/neu oncogene amplification in clinically localised prostate cancer.	"AIM: To examine the incidence of Her-2/neu oncogene amplification in clinically localised prostate cancer using in situ hybridisation. METHODS: One hundred and seventeen patients, who had undergone radical prostatectomy, were identified and in situ hybridisation was performed on formalin fixed, paraffin wax embedded tissue using the Quantum Appligene probe for Her-2/neu. The enzyme peroxidase was used to detect the probe because this enabled a permanent record to be kept. Tumours in which there were five or more signals in each nucleus in > 20% of the tumour cells were considered to have a significantly increased copy number. A serial section from these tumours was then hybridised with the chromosome 17 alpha satellite probe. The ratio of the percentage of cells showing an increase in Her-2/neu copy number to the number showing polysomy for chromosome 17 was calculated. A ratio above 2 was considered amplified. RESULTS: Biochemical recurrence occurred in 50 (43%) patients and 24 (21%) had clinical recurrence. In situ hybridisation for Her-2/neu was accessible in 114 (97%) patients. A significant increase in copy number was present in two patients (1.75 %), but chromosome 17 hybridisation showed that the increase was the result of polysomy rather than true amplification. Both these patients had a Gleason score of 7 and stage T3; they also had recurrent clinical disease with distal metastasis within two and 19 months. CONCLUSIONS: Increased Her-2/neu oncogene copy number appears to be rare in clinically localised prostatic adenocarcinoma and is related to chromosome 17 polysomy rather than true amplification. As a result, it would not be a useful biomarker for identifying those patients who will have recurrences after radical prostatectomy."
11927493	Polymorphic CAG/CAA repeat length in the AIB1/SRC-3 gene and prostate cancer risk: a population-based case-control study.	"In an earlier report, we showed that a shorter CAG repeat length in the androgen receptor (AR) gene is associated with an increased risk of prostate cancer in China, the population with the lowest reported prostate cancer incidence in the world. Because AR coactivators enhance transactivation of AR, in this report we evaluated the relationship of a CAG/CAA repeat length polymorphism in the AIB1/SRC-3 gene (amplified in breast cancer gene 1, a steroid receptor coactivator and an AR coactivator) with prostate cancer risk in a population-based case-control study in China. Genomic DNA from 189 prostate cancer patients and 301 healthy controls was used for the PCR-based assay. The AIB1/SRC-3 CAG/CAA repeat length ranged from 24 to 32, with the most common repeat length being 29. Homozygous 29/29 and heterozygous 28/29 were the most common genotypes, with 44 and 30% of the controls harboring these genotypes, respectively. Relative to subjects homozygous for 29 CAG/CAA repeats (29/29 genotype), individuals with the <29/29 genotype had a nonsignificant 31% increased risk [odds ratio (OR), 1.31; 95% confidence interval (CI), 0.87-1.97], whereas those homozygous for the <29 allele had a significant 81% excess risk (OR, 1.81; 95% CI, 1.00-3.28). The combined effect of CAG repeat lengths in the AR and AIB1/SRC-3 genes was also evaluated. Relative to men with both the 29/29 genotype of the AIB1/SRC-3 gene and a long CAG repeat length (> or =23) in the AR gene, those with both the <29/<29 AIB1/SRC-3 genotype and a short CAG repeat length in the AR gene (<23) had a 2.8-fold risk (OR, 2.78; 95% CI, 1.24-6.26). Together, our data indicate that the CAG/CAA repeat length in the AIB1/SRC-3 gene may be associated with prostate cancer risk in Chinese men and that the combination of CAG/CAA repeat lengths in both the AIB1/SRC-3 and AR genes may provide a useful marker for clinically significant prostate cancer. Expanded studies in other populations are needed to confirm this association and the combined effect of AIB1/SRC-3 and other hormone-related genes in prostate cancer etiology."
11941539	"Germline alterations of the RNASEL gene, a candidate HPC1 gene at 1q25, in patients and families with prostate cancer."	"The RNASEL gene (2',5'-oligoisoadenylate-synthetase dependent) encodes a ribonuclease that mediates the antiviral and apoptotic activities of interferons. The RNASEL gene maps to the hereditary-prostate-cancer (HPC)-predisposition locus at 1q24-q25 (HPC1) and was recently shown to harbor truncating mutations in two families with linkage to HPC1. Here, we screened for RNASEL germline mutations in 66 Finnish patients with HPC, and we determined the frequency of the changes in the index patients from 116 families with HPC, in 492 patients with unselected prostate cancer (PRCA), in 223 patients with benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH), and in 566 controls. A truncating mutation, E265X, was found in 5 (4.3%) of the 116 patients from families with HPC. This was significantly higher (odds ratio [OR] =4.56; P=.04) than the frequency of E265X in controls (1.8%). The highest mutation frequency (9.5%) was found in patients from families with four or more affected members. Possible segregation was detected only in a single family. However, the median age at disease onset for E265X carriers was 11 years less than that for noncarriers in the same families. In addition, of the four missense variants found, R462Q showed an association with HPC (OR=1.96; P=.07). None of the variants showed any differences between controls and either patients with BPH or patients with PRCA. We conclude that, although RNASEL mutations do not explain disease segregation in Finnish families with HPC, the variants are enriched in families with HPC that include more than two affected members and may also be associated with the age at disease onset. This suggests a possible modifying role in cancer predisposition. The impact that the RNASEL sequence variants have on PRCA burden at the population level seems small but deserves further study."
11943705	Heterogeneous methylation and deletion patterns of the INK4a/ARF locus within prostate carcinomas.	"To elucidate the role of p53/p16(INK4a)/RB1 pathways in prostate carcinogenesis, we analyzed the p14(ARF), p16(INK4a), RB1, p21(Waf1), p27(Kip1), PTEN, p73, p53, and MDM2 gene status of multiple areas within 16 histologically heterogeneous prostate carcinomas using methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction, differential polymerase chain reaction, and immunohistochemistry. All focal areas examined had Gleason scores ranging from 1 to 5. Methylation of either PTEN or p73 was undetected in any sample, whereas expression of MDM2 seemed to be an independent event within small foci of 4 of 16 tumors. Loss of p14(ARF), p16(INK4a), RB1, and p27(Kip1) expression correlated with homozygous deletion or promoter hypermethylation. One carcinoma showed co-deletion of both p14(ARF) and p16(INK4a) in two of five areas examined; two areas within another tumor demonstrated concurrent hypermethylation of the promoter regions of the same genes. Focal hypermethylation of RB1, p21(Waf1), and p27(Kip1) was detected within two, two, and three tumors, respectively. These findings indicate that both genetic and epigenetic events occur independently in intratumor foci and further suggest hypermethylation-induced loss of gene function may be as critical as specific genetic mutations in prostate carcinogenesis."
11956172	A glucocorticoid-responsive mutant androgen receptor exhibits unique ligand specificity: therapeutic implications for androgen-independent prostate cancer.	"The cortisol/cortisone-responsive AR (AR(ccr)) has two mutations (L701H and T877A) that were found in the MDA PCa human prostate cancer cell lines established from a castrated patient whose metastatic tumor exhibited androgen-independent growth. Cortisol and cortisone bind to the AR(ccr) with high affinity. In the present study, we characterized the structural determinants for ligand binding to the AR(ccr). Our data revealed that many of the C17, C19, and C21 circulating steroids, at concentrations that are found in vivo, functioned as effective activators of the AR(ccr) but had little or no activity via the wild-type AR or GRalpha. Among the synthetic glucocorticoids tested, dexamethasone activated both GRalpha and AR(ccr), whereas triamcinolone was selective for GRalpha. In MDA PCa 2b cells, growth and prostate-specific antigen production were stimulated by potent AR(ccr) agonists such as cortisol or 9alpha-fluorocortisol but not by triamcinolone (which did not bind to or activate the AR(ccr)). Of the potential antagonists tested, bicalutamide (casodex) and GR antagonist RU38486 showed inhibitory activity. We postulate that corticosteroids provide a growth advantage to prostate cancer cells harboring the promiscuous AR(ccr) in androgen-ablated patients and contribute to their transition to androgen-independence. We predict that triamcinolone, a commonly prescribed glucocorticoid, would be a successful therapeutic agent for men with this form of cancer, perhaps in conjunction with the antagonist casodex. We hypothesize that triamcinolone administration would inhibit the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis, thus suppressing endogenous corticosteroids, which stimulate tumor growth. Triamcinolone, by itself, would not activate the AR(ccr) or promote tumor growth but would provide glucocorticoid activity essential for survival."
11971970	Androgen receptor acetylation governs trans activation and MEKK1-induced apoptosis without affecting in vitro sumoylation and trans-repression function.	"The androgen receptor (AR) is a nuclear hormone receptor superfamily member that conveys both trans repression and ligand-dependent trans-activation function. Activation of the AR by dihydrotestosterone (DHT) regulates diverse physiological functions including secondary sexual differentiation in the male and the induction of apoptosis by the JNK kinase, MEKK1. The AR is posttranslationally modified on lysine residues by acetylation and sumoylation. The histone acetylases p300 and P/CAF directly acetylate the AR in vitro at a conserved KLKK motif. To determine the functional properties governed by AR acetylation, point mutations of the KLKK motif that abrogated acetylation were engineered and examined in vitro and in vivo. The AR acetylation site point mutants showed wild-type trans repression of NF-kappa B, AP-1, and Sp1 activity; wild-type sumoylation in vitro; wild-type ligand binding; and ligand-induced conformational changes. However, acetylation-deficient AR mutants were selectively defective in DHT-induced trans activation of androgen-responsive reporter genes and coactivation by SRC1, Ubc9, TIP60, and p300. The AR acetylation site mutant showed 10-fold increased binding of the N-CoR corepressor compared with the AR wild type in the presence of ligand. Furthermore, histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) bound the AR both in vivo and in cultured cells and HDAC1 binding to the AR was disengaged in a DHT-dependent manner. MEKK1 induced AR-dependent apoptosis in prostate cancer cells. The AR acetylation mutant was defective in MEKK1-induced apoptosis, suggesting that the conserved AR acetylation site contributes to a pathway governing prostate cancer cellular survival. As AR lysine residue mutations that abrogate acetylation correlate with enhanced binding of the N-CoR repressor in cultured cells, the conserved AR motif may directly or indirectly regulate ligand-dependent corepressor disengagement and, thereby, ligand-dependent trans activation."
11975845	Optimizing prostate cancer suicide gene therapy using herpes simplex virus thymidine kinase active site variants.	"The herpes simplex virus (HSV) thymidine kinase gene (tk) forms the basis of a widely used strategy for suicide gene therapy. A library of HSV thymidine kinase enzyme (TK) active site mutants having different affinities for guanosine analog prodrugs was developed. We sought to determine the optimal combination of tk variant and prodrug specifically for prostate cancer gene therapy, using in vitro and in vivo studies of adenovirally infected CL1, DU-145, and LNCaP tumor lines carrying wild-type tk, tk30, tk75, and sr39tk mutants expressed by a strong, constitutive cytomegalovirus promoter and treated with ganciclovir and acyclovir. In vitro experiments involving prostate cancer (CaP) cell line infection were carried out with a broad range of prodrug concentrations, and cell killing was determined by limiting dilution (colony-forming), MTT, and propidium iodide assays. In vivo studies based on CL1-GFP xenograft experiments were carried out to examine the ability of each TK variant to prevent tumor formation and to inhibit tumor growth and development of metastases in established orthotopic and subcutaneous tumors in SCID mice. Both in vitro and in vivo studies suggest improved killing with the sr39tk variant. Thus, the results suggest that the use of sr39tk in future trials of prostate cancer tk suicide gene therapy may be beneficial."
12022038	Analysis of the RNASEL gene in familial and sporadic prostate cancer.	"The RNASEL gene on chromosome 1q25 was recently identified as a candidate gene for hereditary prostate cancer (PC). To confirm these findings, we screened 326 patients from 163 families with familial PC for potential germline mutations, by use of conformation-sensitive gel electrophoresis, followed by direct sequence analysis. A total of six variants were identified, including one intronic and five exonic changes (three missense and two silent alterations). There were no unequivocal pathogenic changes. To further test for potential associations between genes and increased risk for disease, the three missense polymorphisms (Ile97Leu, Arg462Gln, and Glu541Asp) were genotyped in 438 patients with familial PC and in 510 population-based control subjects. Association testing revealed no significant differences between patients and control subjects for either the Leu97 variant (chi(2) trend test = 1.42; P=.23) or the Asp541 variant (chi2=1.52; P=.22). However, significant differences were detected for the Arg462Gln genotypes (chi2=5.20; P=.02; odds ratio [OR] = 0.54; 95% confidence interval [CI] 0.32-0.91) when the genotype Gln/Gln was compared with Arg/Arg. In subset analyses, associations were also observed in the younger group (age at diagnosis </=64 years) (P=.0008; OR=0.29; 95% CI = 0.13-0.66), in node-negative patients (P=.01; OR=0.48; 95% CI 0.27-0.84), patients with stage T(1)/T(2) disease (P=.008; OR=0.39; 95% CI 0.2-0.75), and patients with low-grade disease (P=.01; OR=0.40; 95% CI 0.20-0.78). To evaluate whether this variant was also associated with sporadic PC, we genotyped an additional 499 patients with sporadic PC. Differences in frequency were not detected between patients with sporadic disease and control subjects. However, the same association was observed between patients with familial disease and patients with sporadic disease for the entire group (chi2=4.82; P=.03), as well as in the subset analyses. These results suggest that polymorphic changes within the RNASEL gene may be associated with increased risk of familial but not sporadic PC."
12068172	"Prostatic tissue in mature cystic teratomas of the ovary: a report of four cases, including one with features of prostatic adenocarcinoma, and cytogenetic studies."	"Four cases of mature cystic teratoma that contained prostatic tissue are reported. The ovarian tumors occurred in patients from 17 to 38 (mean 31) years of age and had no unusual clinical or gross aspects. The microscopic findings for the most part were typical of a mature cystic teratoma, but they also contained foci of prostatic tissue that ranged from 0.2 to 1.9 cm in greatest dimension. In these areas there was a lobular arrangement of medium-sized acini lined by cuboidal to columnar cells with pale cytoplasm and round nuclei with inconspicuous nucleoli except focally in one case as noted below. Basal cells were seen focally. The prostatic acini lay in a paucicellular fibromuscular stroma. In two cases thick layers of disorganized smooth muscle covered by transitional-like pseudostratified epithelium, resulting in an appearance resembling fetal bladder wall, were present next to the prostatic glands. One tumor also contained prostatic-type acini, which haphazardly infiltrated the stroma over an area approximately 5 mm in maximal dimension. The acini, a few of which contained intraluminal flocculent eosinophilic material, were lined by cells with eosinophilic to amphophilic focally granular cytoplasm and had nuclei that were enlarged compared with the benign-appearing, prostatic-type acini in the four cases and had focally prominent nucleoli. Basal cells were not identified in these infiltrating glands. Grading this focus according to the approach in the prostate, the morphology was that of a Gleason grade 3 of 5 adenocarcinoma. Immunohistochemical stains of the putative prostatic epithelial cells confirmed their nature by showing immunoreactivity for prostatic-specific antigen in the lining epithelial cells in all four cases and for prostatic-specific acid phosphatase in the one case tested. The high molecular cytokeratin stain, 34betaE12, highlighted basal cells to a variable extent in the three cases containing only benign prostatic tissue. Material was not available to immunostain for basal cells in the case with carcinoma. Cytogenetic studies were performed in two cases and showed that the great majority of the nuclei of the nonprostatic and prostatic tissue had an XX karyotype but from 3% to 5% of the nuclei displayed trisomy for the X chromosome. A small number of cases of prostatic tissue in ovarian teratomas have previously been documented but none had morphologic features of carcinoma."
12085963	Contribution of the androgen receptor to prostate cancer predisposition and progression.	"Although prostate cancer is heterogeneous in its etiology and progression, androgen signaling through the androgen receptor (AR) appears to be involved in all aspects of the disease, from initiation to development of treatment resistance. Lifetime exposure to a constitutively more active AR, encoded by AR alleles as defined by two translated polymorphic microsatellites (CAG and GGC), results in a significant increase in prostate cancer risk. The AR gene is amplified or a target for somatic gain-of-function mutations in metastatic prostate cancer. Gain-of-function AR gene mutations may result in inappropriate activation of the AR, thereby contributing to the failure of conventional androgen-ablation treatments. In cases where no genetically altered receptors are observed, altered signaling through the AR, achieved by cross-talk with other signaling pathways (e.g. kinase-mediated pathways) and/or inappropriate expression of coregulatory proteins, may contribute to disease progression. Thus, the AR-signaling axis contributes to many aspects of prostate cancer, including initiation, progression and resistance to current forms of therapy. This recognition represents a paradigm shift in our understanding of the molecular mechanisms involved in progression of prostate cancer, and provides insight into novel AR-targeted therapies which ultimately may be more effective than current forms of androgen ablation."
12089345	Inhibition of the dihydrotestosterone-activated androgen receptor by nuclear receptor corepressor.	"Nuclear receptor corepressor (NCoR) mediates transcriptional repression by unliganded nuclear receptors and certain steroid hormone receptors (SHRs) bound to nonphysiological antagonists, but has not been found to regulate SHRs bound to their natural ligands. This report demonstrates that NCoR interacts directly with the androgen receptor (AR) and represses dihydrotestosterone-stimulated AR transcriptional activity. The NCoR C terminus, containing the receptor interacting domains, was necessary for repression, which was ablated by mutations in the corepressor nuclear receptor (CoRNR) boxes. In contrast, the NCoR N terminus, containing domains that can recruit histone deacetylases, was not necessary for repression. Binding studies in vitro with a series of glutathione-S-transferase-NCoR and -AR fusion proteins demonstrated a direct interaction that was similarly dependent upon the NCoR corepressor nuclear receptor boxes and AR ligand binding domain and was independent of ligand and helix 12 in the AR ligand binding domain. This NCoR-AR interaction was further demonstrated in mammalian two-hybrid assays and by coimmunoprecipitation of the endogenous proteins from a prostate cancer cell line. Finally, AR transcriptional activity could be enhanced in vivo by sequestration of endogenous NCoR with unliganded thyroid hormone receptor. These results demonstrate that AR, in contrast to other SHRs, is regulated by NCoR and suggest the possibility of developing selective AR modulators that enhance this interaction."
12112525	Clinical significance of alterations of chromosome 8 detected by fluorescence in situ hybridization analysis in pathologic organ-confined prostate cancer.	"Loss of 8p22 and gain of 8q24 are known to be common chromosomal alterations in prostate cancer. We have previously demonstrated that concurrent 8q24 overrepresentation and 8p22 loss were associated with a poor prognosis in patients with high-grade, locally advanced prostate cancer. We evaluated the alteration of 8p22 and 8q24 in a large cohort of pathologic organ-confined prostate cancer using fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) analysis. All 195 patients with Gleason scores > 5, pathologic stage T(2)N(0)M(0) (pT(2)N(0)M(0)) prostate cancer, who underwent a radical prostatectomy at the Mayo Clinic between 1987 and 1991, and for whom blocks were available, were selected for this study. The median follow-up period was 9.5 years, and endpoints of this study were biochemical and clinical disease progression. The latter includes local as well as systemic disease progression. FISH analysis using paraffin-embedded tissues was performed for 8p22 (LPL), centromere 8 (8cen), and 8q24 (MYC) and was successful for 156 tumors (80.0%). Of these tumors, 104 (66.6%) had one or more numeric alterations of the 3 loci evaluated. An increased copy number of 8q24 was observed in 66 (42.3%) tumors, of which 20 (12.8%) had an additional increase (AI) of 8q24, and 46 (29.5%) had a gain of 8q24 with an equivalent gain of 8cen. Losses and gains of 8p22 were detected in 81 (51.9%) and 20 (12.8%) tumors, respectively. An AI of 8q24 was significantly associated with the tumor Gleason score (P = 0.042). Univariate analysis indicated that loss of 8p22 was a significant predictor of biochemical and clinical disease progression (P = 0.025 and P = 0.011, respectively). Furthermore, the group with loss of 8p22 concurrent with an AI of 8q24 (Loss 8p22-any 8cen-AI 8q24) had an increased rate of biochemical disease progression (P = 0.052). Multivariate analysis demonstrated that neither individual nor the Loss-any-AI combination of alterations was a significant independent predictor of disease progression when adjusting for Gleason score, preoperative PSA levels, and DNA ploidy. These data suggest that loss of 8p22 is associated with a poor prognosis, specifically when it is accompanied by AI of 8q24 in pT(2)N(0)M(0) prostate cancer."
12136249	Human hormone-refractory prostate cancers can harbor mutations in the O(2)-dependent degradation domain of hypoxia inducible factor-1alpha (HIF-1alpha).	"PURPOSE: Androgen ablation, the preferred therapy for advanced prostate cancer, reduces blood flow and induces hypoxia in androgen-dependent tissues. Given the transient effectiveness of this therapy, we must consider whether a hypoxia-resistance mechanism might be involved in the development of therapeutic resistance by prostate cancer cells. The transcription factor protein, hypoxia-inducible factor 1alpha (HIF-1alpha), helps increase the expression of gene products that enable cells to survive conditions of hypoxic stress. Enhanced HIF-1alpha expression during hypoxia results from a drastic reduction of its degradation rate within a critical region of the protein referred to as the ""oxygen-dependent degradation (ODD) domain"". We sequenced HIF-1alpha cDNAs amplified from human prostate cancer cell lines and from hormone resistant prostate cancer specimens to determine whether prostate cancer cells might harbor mutations within the HIF-1alpha ODD domain. METHODS: HIF-1alpha cDNAs were RT-PCR amplified from three prostate cancer cell lines (LNCaP, PC-3, and DU145), from five different human hormone-resistant prostate cancers and one normal prostate, all microdissected, and were sequenced to determine whether the HIF-1alpha gene products were wildtype or mutant. One specimen containing a hormone-resistant prostate tumor that expressed a mutated HIF-1alpha cDNA was further microdissected into benign and tumorous regions and DNAs extracted from these regions were directly amplified by PCR and sequenced to determine whether the HIF-1alpha mutation was specific to the tumor. RESULTS: Although the HIF-1alpha cDNAs of all cell lines, the normal prostate, and three of the tumors were found to have a wildtype sequence, HIF-1alpha cDNAs amplified from two hormone-resistant tumors had nucleic acid substitutions that resulted in significant amino acid changes within the ODD domain of the HIF-1alpha protein. Analysis of the DNA extracted from a benign or tumorous region of one of these specimens showed that only the wildtype (nonmutated) form of the HIF-1alpha gene was amplified from the normal DNA whereas only the mutated form of the HIF-1alpha gene was amplified from the tumor. CONCLUSIONS: Some human hormone-refractory prostate cancers have mutations in a critical regulatory domain of the HIF-1alpha protein. We believe that these mutations might enable expression of this protein under inappropriate conditions and contribute to the development of therapeutic resistance by the cancer cells. This hypothesis is currently being tested."
12163131	Transition to androgen-independence in prostate cancer.	"Prostate carcinoma is the most frequently diagnosed malignancy and the second leading cause of death as a result of cancer in men in the western countries. Withdrawal of androgens or the peripheral blockage of androgen action remain the critical therapeutic options for the treatment of advanced prostate cancer. However, after initial regression, most of the prostate cancers become androgen-independent and progress further, with eventual fatal outcome. Understanding the mechanisms of transition to androgen independence and tumor progression in prostate cancer is critical to finding new ways to treat aged patients that are ineligible for conventional chemotherapy. A large number of different molecular mechanisms might be responsible for the transition to androgen-independence. Many of these involve the androgen receptor (AR) and its signalling pathways, but they might also include genetic changes that affect several genes, which results in the activation of oncogenes or the inactivation of tumor suppressor genes. Here, we discuss the most recent and relevant findings on androgen resistance in prostate cancer in order provide a comprehensive interpretation of the clinical behaviour of tumors at molecular levels."
12169393	Alterations in the p16/pRb cell cycle checkpoint occur commonly in primary and metastatic human prostate cancer.	"We examined the status of a cell cycle checkpoint by immunohistochemically staining for p16 and pRb using multiple tissue arrays generated from 49 primary and 23 hormone-sensitive metastatic human prostate cancers. We find that p16, a cell cycle inhibitor, is paradoxically overexpressed in 83% of proliferating primary prostate cancers and increased expression correlates with a more rapid treatment failure (P=0.01) and a higher histologic grade (P=0.001). pRb staining is heterogeneous, loses expression infrequently (19%), and does not correlate with p16 expression. Loss of either p16 or pRb expression is found significantly (P=0.01) more commonly (55%) in metastatic specimens. The remarkable frequency of p16/pRb alterations and strong clinical associations implicates inactivation of this pathway as a critical determinant in prostate cancer progression."
12172428	Microsatellite instability and prostate cancer: clinical and pathological implications.	"PURPOSE OF REVIEW: The purpose of this review is to discuss early and recent reports investigating microsatellite instability and mismatch repair expression in prostate cancer. RECENT FINDINGS: Human mismatch repair genes encode highly conserved interacting proteins that suppress genetic instability by correcting misincorporated nucleotides and insertion/deletion mispairs formed during DNA replication. Mismatch repair deficiency causes genetic instability at microsatellite sequences because of the cell's inability to correct errors caused by DNA polymerase slippage at repetitive sequences. Microsatellite instability is characteristic of mismatch repair deficiency, and has been used as a surrogate marker for the inactivation of mismatch repair genes. Inherited mismatch repair gene mutations predispose to gastrointestinal and genitourinary malignancies in a cancer predisposition syndrome known as hereditary non-polyposis colorectal carcinoma. Although strong evidence for an inherited predisposition to prostate cancer does not exist in hereditary non-polyposis colorectal carcinoma, mismatch repair deficiency and mismatch repair gene mutations have been described in sporadic prostate cancer and prostate cancer cell lines. Early reports detected microsatellite instability in prostate cancer, and correlated this genetic alteration to clinical and pathological findings in men diagnosed with this malignancy. Recent reports have identified mismatch repair gene mutations, mismatch repair deficiency and differential mismatch repair gene expression in prostate cancer. In addition, a prognostic role for mismatch repair gene expression in prostate cancer has been suggested. SUMMARY: The early identification of microsatellite instability in prostate cancer led to more specific investigation of mismatch repair gene expression. Although additional research is required, mismatch repair gene expression may have important biological and clinical significance in prostate cancer."
12180237	Chromosomal changes in incidental prostatic carcinomas detected by comparative genomic hybridization.	"OBJECTIVES: The genetic changes underlying the development and progression of prostate cancer are poorly understood. To identify chromosomal regions in incidental prostatic carcinoma (T1a and T1b) was the primary aim of this study. MATERIALS AND METHODS: We used comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) to search for DNA sequence copy number changes on a series of 48 T1 prostate cancer diagnosed by transurethral resection (TURP) and by adenomectomy. Incidental prostatic carcinomas have not been studied by CGH previously. RESULTS: CGH analysis indicated that 14 cases (29.2%) of incidental prostatic carcinoma showed chromosome alterations. The most frequent alterations were chromosomal losses of 8p (10.4%), 13q (6.3%), 5q (4.2%) and 18q (4.2%), and gains of 17p (10.4%), 17q (10.4%), 9q (6.3%) and 7q (4.2%). Minimal overlapping chromosomal regions of loss, indicative for the presence of tumor suppressor genes (TSGs), were mapped to 8p22 and 13q14.1-q21.3, and minimal overlapping regions of gain, indicative for the presence of oncogenes, were found at 9q34.2-qter, 17p12 and 17q24-qter. The statistical analysis displayed a significant association between chromosomal aberration detected by CGH and high Gleason score (P < 0.005) as well as between tumor categories T1a and T1b and chromosomal imbalance (P = 0.041). CONCLUSIONS: Studies directed at incidental prostatic carcinomas allow discovery of chromosomal changes in small and highly malignant tumors. Our results suggest that loss or gain of DNA in these regions are important in prostate cancer. This is the first study, which documents the spectrum of chromosomal changes in incidental prostatic carcinomas."
12183404	Few FH mutations in sporadic counterparts of tumor types observed in hereditary leiomyomatosis and renal cell cancer families.	"Loss of function mutations in the fumarate hydratase (fumarase, FH) gene were recently identified as the cause for dominantly inherited uterine and cutaneous leiomyomas and renal cell cancer. To further evaluate the role of FH in tumorigenesis, we screened FH mutations from tumor types seen in hereditary leiomyomatosis and renal cell cancer mutation carriers-41 uterine and 10 cutaneous leiomyomas, 52 renal cell carcinomas, 53 sarcomas, 29 prostate carcinomas, and 15 lobular breast carcinomas. Few mutations were detected. Biallelic inactivation of FH was found in one uterine leiomyosarcoma, one cutaneous leiomyoma, and one soft tissue sarcoma. Whereas the two former lesions were shown to originate from a germ-line mutation, the soft tissue sarcoma is to our knowledge the first example of purely somatic inactivation of FH in tumors."
12192601	Prostate cancer aggressiveness locus on chromosome 7q32-q33 identified by linkage and allelic imbalance studies.	"The biologic aggressiveness of prostate tumors is an important indicator of prognosis. Chromosome 7q32-q33 was recently reported to show linkage to more aggressive prostate cancer, based on Gleason score, in a large sibling pair study. We report confirmation and narrowing of the linked region using finer-scale genotyping. We also report a high frequency of allelic imbalance (AI) defined within this locus in a series of 48 primary prostate tumors from men unselected for family history or disease status. The highest frequency of AI was observed with adjacent markers D7S2531 (52%) and D7S1804 (36%). These two markers delineated a common region of AI, with 24 tumors exhibiting interstitial AI involving one or both markers. The 1.1-Mb candidate region contains relatively few transcripts. Additionally, we observed positive associations between interstitial AI at D7S1804 and early age at diagnosis (P=.03) as well as a high combined Gleason score and tumor stage (P=.06). Interstitial AI at D7S2531 was associated with a positive family history of prostate cancer (P=.05). These data imply that we have localized a prostate cancer tumor aggressiveness loci to chromosome 7q32-q33 that is involved in familial and nonfamilial forms of prostate cancer."
12200121	Polymorphisms of the CYP1B1 gene have higher risk for prostate cancer.	"Various carcinogenic factors including estrogen metabolites play a role in malignant transformation. These metabolites are formed in part, as a result of the hydroxylation activity of cytochrome P450 (CYP) 1B1. Variant forms of this enzyme have been shown to enhance its activity, and thus, we hypothesize that single nucleotide polymorphisms of the CYP1B1 gene can be a risk factor for prostate cancer. To test this hypothesis, the genetic distribution of six different CYP1B1 polymorphisms at intron 1 (C-->T), codon 48 (C-->G), codon 119 (G-->T), codon 432 (C-->G), codon 449 (C-->T), and codon 453 (A-->G) was analyzed in 117 prostate cancer samples and 200 healthy normal subjects from a Japanese population. Results of these experiments demonstrate that the genotype at codon 119 is significantly different between prostate cancer patients and controls (P<0.001). The odds ratio of genotype T/T compared to G/G (reference) was calculated as 4.02 with a 95% confidence interval of 1.73-9.38. All other codons, except 453, showed polymorphisms but were not significantly different between cancer patients and controls. No association was found between stage and grade of cancer with any of the polymorphic sites. This is the first report that demonstrates the polymorphism at codon 119 of CYP1B1 to be associated with prostatic carcinogenesis. These results are important in understanding the role of CYP1B1 polymorphisms in the pathogenesis of prostate cancer."
12203791	Chromosomal aberrations in prostate cancer xenografts detected by comparative genomic hybridization.	"A major problem in studying prostate cancer has been the lack of model systems because of the difficulties in growing prostate cancer cells in vitro. Recently, however, several human prostate cancer xenografts, grown in immune-deficient mice, have been established. Here, we characterized 13 such xenografts (LuCaP 23.8, 23.12, 35, 41, 49, 58, 69, 70, 73, LAPC-4AD, LAPC-4AI, LAPC-9AD, and LAPC-9AI) as well as one prostate cancer cell line (22Rv1) derived from a xenograft for chromosomal alterations by comparative genomic hybridization and a modification of multicolor fluorescence in situ hybridization. On average, the xenografts contained 13 (range 5-28) aberrations, 5 (1-13) gains, and 8 (1-15) losses, per case. The chromosome arms that most often contained losses were 2q, 5q, 6q, 8p, 13q, and 18q, and gains were 7q, 8q, and Xq. The same regions were previously shown to be often altered in advanced prostate carcinomas in patients. The androgen-dependent and corresponding androgen-independent sublines of LAPC-4 and LAPC-9 shared all genetic alterations, suggesting that the transition of the growth from androgen dependency to independence does not involve major chromosomal aberrations in these two models. In conclusion, the identified genetic aberrations lay the groundwork for further detailed genetic analyses of these xenografts."
12237884	Amplification of the androgen receptor gene in bone metastases from hormone-refractory prostate cancer.	"The aim of this study was to examine the prevalence of androgen receptor (AR) amplification in metastases to bone and other sites in patients with hormone-refractory prostate cancer (HRPC) and to compare these findings with those in pretreatment primary tumour samples from the same patients. Tissue from 24 patients with HRPC was available for study, together with 13 primary tumour specimens. AR gene amplification and copy number for X-chromosome were assessed by fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) using a SpectrumOrange-labelled probe at locus Xq11-13 for the AR gene and a SpectrumGreen-labelled alpha-satellite probe for the X-chromosome (Vysis, UK, Ltd.). A minimum of 20 nuclei were scored in each of three tumour areas by two independent observers. Samples from 18/24 patients with HRPC (12 bone marrow biopsies, three local tumour recurrences, and three lymph nodes) and nine primary tumour specimens were adequate for FISH analysis. Results were expressed as a mean ratio of AR gene copy number : mean X-chromosome number, with a ratio of greater than 1.5 defined as amplification. AR gene amplification was seen in 9/18 (50%) cases of HRPC and in none of the primary (untreated) tumour specimens (p = 0.0048, Fisher's exact test). For the 12 bone marrow samples, AR gene amplification occurred in 5/12 (38%) cases. Elevated copy number for chromosome X occurred in 3/18 (17%) HRPC and 4/9 (44%) matched primary tumours. This study shows for the first time that AR gene amplification can be demonstrated by FISH in bone metastases from HRPC patients. Because bone marrow biopsies can be obtained from most patients with HRPC, the findings provide a rational basis for the routine selection of patients who may respond more favourably to second-line anti-androgen therapy."
12242723	"Oncolytic viral gene therapy for prostate cancer using two attenuated, replication-competent, genetically engineered herpes simplex viruses."	"BACKGROUND: Attenuated, replication-competent herpes simplex virus mutants offer an exciting new modality in cancer therapy through their ability to selectively replicate within and kill malignant cells with minimal harm to normal tissues. METHODS: This study investigates the efficacy of two such viruses, G207 and NV1020, in human prostatic carcinoma. In vitro studies were performed on four human prostatic carcinoma cell lines, and in vivo single/multiple dose studies were undertaken on mice by using two human cell types. Tumor volume, histopathology at necropsy, and serum prostate specific antigen (PSA) were used as measures of antiproliferative effect in the in vivo experiments. RESULTS: Both viruses were effective in producing cytolytic effects in vitro at various multiplicities of infection in all cell lines tested. Both viruses demonstrated antitumor effects in vivo with a statistically significant decrease in serum PSA and inhibition of growth of both PC-3 and C4-2 subcutaneous xenografts. Tumor-free animals at necropsy were observed in the treated groups but not in control animals. CONCLUSION: These results display impressive activity against human prostate cancer and offer promise for the use of this modality in the future."
12244320	Germline mutations and sequence variants of the macrophage scavenger receptor 1 gene are associated with prostate cancer risk.	"Deletions on human chromosome 8p22-23 in prostate cancer cells and linkage studies in families affected with hereditary prostate cancer (HPC) have implicated this region in the development of prostate cancer. The macrophage scavenger receptor 1 gene (MSR1, also known as SR-A) is located at 8p22 and functions in several processes proposed to be relevant to prostate carcinogenesis. Here we report the results of genetic analyses that indicate that mutations in MSR1 may be associated with risk of prostate cancer. Among families affected with HPC, we identified six rare missense mutations and one nonsense mutation in MSR1. A family-based linkage and association test indicated that these mutations co-segregate with prostate cancer (P = 0.0007). In addition, among men of European descent, MSR1 mutations were detected in 4.4% of individuals affected with non-HPC as compared with 0.8% of unaffected men (P = 0.009). Among African American men, these values were 12.5% and 1.8%, respectively (P = 0.01). These results show that MSR1 may be important in susceptibility to prostate cancer in men of both African American and European descent."
12373607	HPC2/ELAC2 polymorphisms and prostate cancer risk: analysis by age of onset of disease.	"The candidate prostate cancer susceptibility gene HPC2/ELAC2 has two common coding polymorphisms: (Ser-->Leu 217) and (Ala-->Thr 541). The Thr541 variant in the HPC2/ELAC2 gene has previously been reported to be at an increased frequency in prostate cancer cases. To evaluate this hypothesis we genotyped 432 prostate cancer patients (including 262 patients diagnosed <or=55 years) and 469 UK, population based control individuals with no family history of cancer. We found no significant difference in the frequencies of Thr541-containing genotypes between cases and controls (OR=1.41, 95% CI 0.79-2.50). The association remained non-significant when the analysis was restricted to cases divided by age of onset into those diagnosed <or=55 years (OR=1.50, 95% CI 0.79-2.85) or to patients diagnosed >55 years (OR=1.27, 95% CI 0.59-2.74). We conclude that any association between the Thr541 variant and prostate cancer is likely to be weak."
12374686	Investigation in liver tissues and cell lines of the transcription of 13 genes mapping to the 16q24 region that are frequently deleted in hepatocellular carcinoma.	"Many studies have associated chromosomal deletions in the 16q24 region with human cancers, including hepatocellular carcinoma. A more limited region around the microsatellite D16S402 has been shown implicated in the metastatic spread of hepatocellular carcinoma, prostate cancer, and Wilms' tumors. It is likely that one or more tumor suppressor genes are located in this 16q24 area. We used SYBR Green reagents to quantify, by real-time quantitative RT-PCR, the production of mRNA for 13 genes mapping to 16q24. The locations of these genes were determined from published human genome sequencing data. We studied mRNA levels in 10 liver tumor tissues, 10 nontumor liver tissues, five hepatoma cell lines, and in isolated hepatocytes. Results were compared with those for loss of heterozygosity observed in the D16S402 region and recurrence. No down-regulation was observed in tumor tissues. Two genes were consistently overexpressed: OKL38 and CDH13. CDH13, which functions in cell-cell adhesion, seems to be involved in liver carcinogenesis. However, no relationship was observed between the expression of this gene and changes in the D16S402 microsatellite or tumor recurrence. None of the other genes tested seemed to be a good candidate for a major tumor suppressor gene in liver carcinogenesis. Our results suggest that additional unknown genes involved in carcinogenesis are located in the 16q24 area."
12393912	A Non-sequence-specific double-stranded RNA structural element regulates splicing of two mutually exclusive exons of fibroblast growth factor receptor 2 (FGFR2).	"Alternative splicing of fibroblast growth factor receptor 2 (FGFR2) mutually exclusive exons IIIb and IIIc represents a tightly regulated and functionally relevant example of post-transcriptional gene regulation. Rat prostate cancer DT3 and AT3 cell lines demonstrate exclusive selection of either exon IIIb or exon IIIc, respectively, and have been used to characterize regulatory FGFR2 RNA cis-elements that are required for splicing regulation. Two sequences termed ISE-2 and ISAR are located in the intron between exons IIIb and IIIc and are required for cell-type specific exon IIIb. Previous studies suggest that the function of these elements involves formation of an RNA stem structure, even though they are separated by more than 700 nucleotides. Using transfected minigenes, we performed a systematic analysis of the sequence and structural components of ISE-2 and ISAR that are required for their ability to regulate FGFR2 splicing. We found that the primary sequence of these elements can be replaced by completely unrelated sequences, provided that they are also predicted to form an RNA stem structure. Thus, a nonsequence-specific double stranded RNA stem constitutes a functional element required for FGFR2 splicing; suggesting that a double-stranded RNA binding protein is a component of the splicing regulatory machinery."
12400993	"The diet, prostate inflammation, and the development of prostate cancer."	"Evidence that somatic inactivation of GSTP1, encoding the human pi-class glutathione S-transferase, may initiate prostatic carcinogenesis is reviewed along with epidemiological evidence implicating several environment and lifestyle factors, including the diet and sexually transmitted diseases, as prostate cancer risk factors. An integrated model is presented featuring GSTPI function as a 'caretaker' gene during the pathogenesis of prostate cancer, in which the early loss of GSTPI activity renders prostate cells vulnerable to genome damage associated with chronic prostatic inflammation and repeated exposure to carcinogens. The model predicts that the critical prostate carcinogens will be those that are substrates for GSTP1 detoxification and are associated with high prostate cancer risk diet and lifestyle habits."
12415269	RNASEL Arg462Gln variant is implicated in up to 13% of prostate cancer cases.	"RNASEL (encoding ribonuclease L) has recently been proposed as a candidate for the hereditary prostate cancer (HPC1) gene. We determined that the RNASEL variant Arg462Gln has three times less enzymatic activity than the wildtype and is significantly associated with prostate cancer risk (P = 0.007). At least one copy of the mutated allele that causes this substitution is carried by nearly 60% of the men in our study. Men that are heterozygous with respect to the mutated allele have 50% greater risk of prostate cancer than non-carriers, and homozygotes have more than double the risk."
12420223	The emergence of protocadherin-PC expression during the acquisition of apoptosis-resistance by prostate cancer cells.	"In order to identify gene products associated with the development of acquired therapeutic resistance by prostate cancer cells, we created two novel apoptosis-resistant prostate cancer cell lines, LNCaP-TR (phorbol-ester [TPA]-Resistant) and LNCaP-SSR (Serum Starvation-Resistant) by repeated transient exposure of cultured human LNCaP cells to apoptotic stimuli followed by expansion of surviving cell populations. These cell lines were found to be cross-resistant to the alternative selective agent and also hormone-resistant when xenografted into castrated male immunodeficient mice. RNA from the LNCaP-TR line was comparatively screened using a subtractive hybridization-PCR procedure. This allowed us to identify a 249 bp cDNA fragment that hybridized to a 4.8 kb mRNA preferentially expressed by the apoptosis-resistant cells. Using RACE procedures, we cloned and sequenced the complete 4.8 kb cDNA. It is an unusual member of the protocadherin gene family containing two large overlapping open reading frames encoding homologous polypeptides, one having a signal sequence and the other lacking a signal sequence and we refer to it as protocadherin-PC. LNCaP cells directly transformed with protocadherin-PC cDNA were comparatively resistant to phorbol-ester induced apoptosis. Antibody recognition studies demonstrating the cytoplasmic nature of the protcadherin-PC translation product and its propensity to bind beta-catenin suggest that it might influence the apoptotic sensitivity of prostate cancer cells through a unique mechanism."
12421676	The role of transsignalling via the agonistic soluble IL-6 receptor in human diseases.	"The activation of cells that do not express the membrane bound interleukin-6 6 receptor (IL-6R) by IL-6 and the soluble IL-6 receptor (sIL-6R) is termed transsignalling. Transsignalling may be an pathogenetic factor in human diseases as diverse as multiple myeloma (MM), Castleman's disease, prostate carcinoma, Crohn's disease, systemic sclerosis, Still's disease, osteoporosis and cardiovascular diseases. IL-6 and sIL-6R may directly or indirectly enhance their own production on endothelial or bone marrow stromal cells. Positive feedback autocrine loops thus created in affected organs may either cause or maintain disease progression. In autoimmune or vasculitic disease, the ability of the IL-6/sIL-6R complex to inhibit apoptosis of autoreactive T-cells may be central to the development of tissue specific autoimmunity. The anti-apoptotic effect of the IL-6/sIL-6R complex may be involved in tumour genesis and resistance to chemotherapy.Only in rare cases, where counterregulation has failed, there is a notable systemic effect of IL-6/sIL-6R. Appropriate animal models are necessary to establish the pathogenetic role of the IL-6/sIL-6R complex. A specific treatment option for diseases influenced by the sIL-6R could be based on gp130-Fc, a soluble gp130 (sgp130) linked to the Fc-fragment of IgG1. gp130-Fc has shown efficacy in vivo in animal models of Crohn's disease."
12429819	Pattern of somatic androgen receptor gene mutations in patients with hormone-refractory prostate cancer.	"Progression to hormone-refractory growth of prostate cancer has been suggested to be mediated by androgen receptor (AR) gene alterations. We analyzed AR for mutations and amplifications in 21 locally recurrent prostate carcinomas treated with orchiectomy, estrogens, or a combination of orchiectomy and estramustine phosphate using fluorescence in situ hybridization, single-strand conformation polymorphism, and DNA sequence analyses. Amplification was observed in 4 of 16 (25%) and amino acid changing mutations was observed in 7 of 21 (33%) of the tumors, respectively. Two (50%) tumors with AR amplification also had missense mutation of the gene. Four of five (80%) cancers that were treated with a combination of orchiectomy and estramustine phosphate had a mutation clustered at codons 514 to 533 in the N-terminal domain of AR. In functional studies, these mutations did not render AR more sensitive to testosterone, dihydrotestosterone, androstenedione, or beta-estradiol. Tumors treated by orchiectomy had mutations predominantly in the ligand-binding domain. In summary, we found molecular alterations of AR in more than half of the prostate carcinomas that recurred locally. Some tumors developed both aberrations, possibly enhancing the cancer cell to respond efficiently to low levels of androgens. Furthermore, localization of point mutations in AR seems to be influenced by the type of treatment."
12445232	Expression and somatic mutation on androgen receptor gene in prostate cancer.	"BACKGROUND: Lack of androgen receptor (AR) expression or mutation on the AR gene creates the tendency for androgen independence and progression of prostate cancer. However, the association between the progression and AR expression or mutations is still controversial. In this study, we evaluated the prognostic significance of AR expression and mutations in prostate cancers. METHODS: Forty-two prostate adenocarcinomas and three lymph node metastatic lesions sampled prior to hormonal therapy were included in this study; AR expression was analyzed immunohistochemically using an antibody against AR and the result was scored as the percentage of AR-positive tumor cells in the total tumor cells. Polymerase chain reaction-single-strand conformational polymorphism (PCR-SSCP) analysis and DNA sequencing were used to detect AR mutations. RESULTS: Our study revealed the average AR expression in the prostate adenocarcinoma was 52.2 +/- 27.1%, which was significantly lower than that in the adjacent non-tumorous prostate tissue (68.3 +/- 18.3% in average) (P < 0.001). A significant correlation was obtained between progression-free survival and AR expression (P < 0.01). By SSCP analysis, three silent mutations (T649T, E709E and E711E) were detected in three separate prostate carcinomas. CONCLUSION: : We conclude that AR expression is a useful prognostic indicator for tumor progression. Androgen receptor mutation may be an uncommon molecular event in untreated prostate cancer in Japanese men."
12467220	Inhibition of growth of human prostate cancer xenograft by transfection of p53 gene: gene transfer by electroporation.	"To date, there is no effective therapy for hormone-independent prostate cancer. Therefore, as a new strategy for refractory cancer, gene therapy is showing increasing promise. In this study, we attempted to use a nonviral gene transfer system, in vivo electroporation, in prostate cancer cell PC-3 xenografts with the wild-type p53 (wt-p53) gene, as gene therapy for hormone-independent prostate cancer. To evaluate this in vivo gene transfer method, the beta-galactosidase gene was transfected into xenografts by electroporation. Then, the efficiency of transfection of exogenous p53 gene by electroporation was confirmed by reverse transcription-PCR, which indicated that p53 mRNA was present in samples from xenografts. Next, to estimate the reduction of prostate cancer xenografts by this method, we measured the size of PC-3 xenografts in nude mice after electroporation with the wt-p53 gene. The growth of tumors was markedly suppressed by wt-p53 gene transfection by electroporation compared with transfection of mutated type p53 gene (P = 0.0027) or vector only (P = 0.0015). Furthermore, histological specimens revealed increased apoptotic cell death in p53-transfected tumors. These results suggest that it is possible to transfer wt-p53 into prostate cancer xenografts using electroporation and to suppress the growth of tumors; they, furthermore, suggest that this system might be used for local advanced hormone-independent prostate cancer."
12471593	Common sequence variants of the macrophage scavenger receptor 1 gene are associated with prostate cancer risk.	"Rare germline mutations of macrophage scavenger receptor 1 (MSR1) gene were reported to be associated with prostate cancer risk in families with hereditary prostate cancer (HPC) and in patients with non-HPC (Xu et al. 2002). To further evaluate the role of MSR1 in prostate cancer susceptibility, at Johns Hopkins Hospital, we studied five common variants of MSR1 in 301 patients with non-HPC who underwent prostate cancer treatment and in 250 control subjects who participated in prostate cancer-screening programs and had normal digital rectal examination and PSA levels (<4 ng/ml). Significantly different allele frequencies between case subjects and control subjects were observed for each of the five variants (P value range.01-.04). Haplotype analyses provided consistent findings, with a significant difference in the haplotype frequencies from a global score test (P=.01). Because the haplotype that is associated with the increased risk for prostate cancer did not harbor any of the known rare mutations, it appears that the observed association of common variants and prostate cancer risk are independent of the effect of the known rare mutations. These results consistently suggest that MSR1 may play an important role in prostate carcinogenesis."
12471610	Current status of the molecular genetics of human prostatic adenocarcinomas.	"Molecular genetic mechanisms involved in the progression of prostate cancer are not well understood due to extensive tumor heterogeneity and lack of suitable models. New methods such as fluorescence in-situ hybridization (FISH), comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) and microsatellite analysis have documented losses or gains on various chromosomes. Altered chromosomal regions have been associated with the activation of oncogenes and the inactivation of tumor suppressor genes or defects in mismatch repair (MMR) genes. It is suggested that increased genomic instability is associated with decreased androgen-responsive and progressive behavior of human prostate tumors, but it remains unclear whether this genomic instability is causing the progression of cancer or is the consequence of cancer. Extended studies on hereditary prostate cancer have identified 7 prostate cancer susceptibility loci on several chromosomes, but no specific gene has been confined for a large proportion of susceptibility. In this review we summarize the ongoing molecular genetic events associated with the sporadic and hereditary prostate cancer development and progression."
12473651	Characterization of a novel negative regulator (DOC-2/DAB2) of c-Src in normal prostatic epithelium and cancer.	"DOC-2/DAB2 is a potent tumor suppressor in many cancer types including prostate cancer. In prostate cancer, expression of DOC-2/DAB2 can inhibit its growth. Our recent studies demonstrate that DOC-2/DAB2 can suppress both protein kinase C and peptide growth factor-elicited signal pathways via the Ras-mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway. In this study, we further showed that the proline-rich domain of DOC-2/DAB2 could also interact with proteins containing the Src homology 3 domain, such as Src and Fgr. The binding of c-Src to DOC-2/DAB2 was enhanced in cells treated with growth factor, and this interaction resulted in c-Src inactivation. The c-Src inactivation was evidenced by the decreased tyrosine 416 phosphorylation of c-Src and reduced downstream effector activation. It appears that DOC-2/DAB2 can bind to Src homology 3 domain of c-Src and maintain it in an inactive conformation. Thus, this study provides a new mechanism for modulating c-Src in prostatic epithelium and cancer."
12474142	Two percent of men with early-onset prostate cancer harbor germline mutations in the BRCA2 gene.	"Studies of families with breast cancer have indicated that male carriers of BRCA2 mutations are at increased risk of prostate cancer, particularly at an early age. To evaluate the contribution of BRCA2 mutations to early-onset prostate cancer, we screened the complete coding sequence of BRCA2 for germline mutations, in 263 men with diagnoses of prostate cancer who were </=55 years of age. Protein-truncating mutations were found in six men (2.3%; 95% confidence interval 0.8%-5.0%), and all of these mutations were clustered outside the ovarian-cancer cluster region. The relative risk of developing prostate cancer by age 56 years from a deleterious germline BRCA2 mutation was 23-fold. Four of the patients with mutations did not have a family history of breast or ovarian cancer. Twenty-two variants of uncertain significance were also identified. These results confirm that BRCA2 is a high-risk prostate-cancer-susceptibility gene and have potential implications for the management of early-onset prostate cancer, in both patients and their relatives."
12475935	"POTE, a highly homologous gene family located on numerous chromosomes and expressed in prostate, ovary, testis, placenta, and prostate cancer."	"We have identified a gene located on chromosomes 21 that is expressed in normal and neoplastic prostate, and in normal testis, ovary, and placenta. We name this gene POTE (expressed in prostate, ovary, testis, and placenta). The POTE gene has 11 exons and 10 introns and spans approximately equal 32 kb of chromosome 21q11.2 region. The 1.83-kb mRNA of POTE encodes a protein of 66 kDa. Ten paralogs of the gene have been found dispersed among eight different chromosomes (2, 8, 13, 14, 15, 18, 21, and 22) with preservation of ORFs and splice junctions. The synonymous:nonsynonymous ratio indicates that the genes were duplicated rather recently but are diverging at a rate faster than the average for other paralogous genes. In prostate and in testis, at least five different paralogs are expressed. In situ hybridization shows that POTE is expressed in basal and terminal cells of normal prostate epithelium. It is also expressed in some prostate cancers and in the LnCAP prostate cancer cell line. The POTE protein contains seven ankyrin repeats between amino acids 140 and 380. Expression of POTE in prostate cancer and its undetectable expression in normal essential tissues make POTE a candidate for the immunotherapy of prostate cancer. The existence of a large number of closely related but rapidly diverging members, their location on multiple chromosomes and their limited expression pattern suggest an important role for the POTE gene family in reproductive processes."
12481255	Allelic imbalance in hereditary and sporadic prostate cancer.	"BACKGROUND: In this study, we evaluate the pattern of allelic imbalance (AI) in both sporadic prostate cancer (SPC) and hereditary prostate cancer (HPC) at loci that frequently show allelic imbalance in sporadic prostate cancer, or are believed to have a putative role in the disease. METHODS: DNA obtained from 35 sporadic tumors and 46 hereditary tumors were tested for AI, by using a panel of 35 microsatellite markers. RESULTS: Chromosomal regions that display high frequencies of AI (>or=30%) in HPC include 1q, 5q, 7q, 8p, 13q, 16q, 17q, 18q, and 20q. In SPC, high frequencies of AI were found at 5q, 7q, 8p, 10q, 13q. Main differences (delta >or= 20%) in AI between HPC and SPC were at 1q, 10q, 17q, 18q, and 20q. CONCLUSION: AI at the prostate cancer susceptibility loci HPC1, PCaP, and HPC20 was seen more often in HPC compared with SPC. It appears that there are marked differences in the pattern of AI between sporadic and hereditary PCa."
12482965	AKT-independent protection of prostate cancer cells from apoptosis mediated through complex formation between the androgen receptor and FKHR.	"Recent studies suggested that the protection of cell apoptosis by AKT involves phosphorylation and inhibition of FKHR and related FOXO forkhead transcription factors and that androgens provide an AKT-independent cell survival signal in prostate cancer cells. Here, we report receptor-dependent repression of FKHR function by androgens in prostate cancer cells. Transcriptional analysis demonstrated that activation of the androgen receptor caused an inhibition of both wild-type FKHR and a mutant in which all three known AKT sites were mutated to alanines, showing that the repression is AKT independent. In vivo and in vitro coprecipitation studies demonstrated that the repression is mediated through protein-protein interaction between FKHR and the androgen receptor. Mapping analysis localized the interacting domains to the carboxyl terminus between amino acids 350 and 655 of FKHR and to the amino-terminal A/B region and the ligand binding domain of the receptor. Further analysis demonstrated that the activated androgen receptor blocked FKHR's DNA binding activity and impaired its ability to induce Fas ligand expression and prostate cancer cell apoptosis and cell cycle arrest. These studies identify a new mechanism for androgen-mediated prostate cancer cell survival that appears to be independent of the activity of the receptor on androgen response element-mediated transcription and establish FKHR and related FOXO forkhead proteins as important nuclear targets for both AKT-dependent and -independent survival signals in prostate cancer cells."
12487060	Dendritic cell gene therapy.	"All of these studies taken together highlight key areas that must be addressed in the future in order for the field to continue to move forward. These issues are many, including but not limited to method of delivery of dendritic cells to patients, maturation status of the dendritic cells, and methods of monitoring responses to these vaccines. Each of these requires some comment. Different strategies of immunization were used in these studies. DCs were injected at various times and in various locations, including intradermally/subcutaneously, intranodally, and intravenously. Investigation of the pattern of spread of subcutaneously injected fluorescently labeled DCs in the chimpanzee was studied at the University of Pittsburgh. Although rodent DCs had previously been shown to remain at the site of injection, these immature primate DCs migrated to draining lymph nodes and interact appropriately with T cells for as long as 5 days after administration. Data not shown in the same study reveal that intravenously administered DCs were undetectable in draining lymph nodes. Two groups have undertaken evaluation of route of administration of DCs in humans. The first of these examined migration of immature, indium-111-labeled dendritic cells after RNA-loading in metastatic cancer patients [44]. The DCs were injected either intravenously, subcutaneously, and intradermally. Only DCs injected intradermally were cleared from the injection site with migration to regional lymph nodes. The immunologic significance of these findings is unclear, however. Another study examined this issue by studying prostatic acid phosphatase (PAP) protein-loaded mature DCs injected intravenously, intradermally, and intralymphatically in prostate cancer patients [45]. Regardless of route of administration, T cell responses were induced as measured by proliferation when PBMCs in vitro were stimulated with the PAP protein. Cytokine analysis of the patients revealed that the majority of patients undergoing either intralymphatic or intradermal injection had increases in measurable interferon-gamma but that none of the intravenously-injected patients did. The intralymphatic and intradermal routes thus seem to lead to stronger Th1 responses. But no data was presented regarding the numbers of PAP precursors induced by vaccination nor their specificity/cytotoxicity. Another issue in DC administration that should also affect route of administration is maturation status of the dendritic cells. Many of the studies used immature dendritic cells to immunize patients whereas others used mature cells. A number of studies have demonstrated that maturation signals such as inflammatory cytokines and CD40 ligation lead to down-regulation of antigen processing and up-regulation of the chemokine receptor CCR7, which leads to homing to lymph nodes [46] as well as the MHC molecules, costimulatory molecules, and maturation markers [8,47,48]. In addition, different maturation agents and sequences of addition of these maturation agents may lead to differences in functions of dendritic cells [48-51]. Others have found that injection of immature DCs pulsed with influenza matrix peptide and KLH, and lead to greater numbers of influenza-specific T cells, but these cells had reduced interferon-gamma production and lacked killer activity [52]. Perhaps the most impressive results in a clinical trial, however, were gained by injecting similar cells loaded with melanoma peptides [21]. In addition, sequence of loading and maturation may be important in creating vaccines. One study using CEA peptides and CEA RNA found that optimal T cell presentation occurs when peptides are loaded after maturation with CD40 ligand and when RNA is transfected before maturation with CD40 ligand [53]. As all of these studies reveal, more investigation into the role of DC maturation as well as its timing and sequence is needed. Finally, a multitude of methods to detect response to vaccination have been attempted in all of the above studies. Many use DTH responses, but these may measure CD4 T cells instead of CD8 T cells. The availability of tetramers allows easier quantification of CTL precursors, but they provide no assessment of the function of these T cells. Enzyme-linked immunospot assays allow identification and quantification of numbers of cells producing cytokines such as interferon-gamma when encountering target antigens, but cytokine production may not correlate with tumor cell killing. Chromium release assays or flow cytometric assays for molecules such as perforin may be used to validate killing, but inability of many tumors to grow in vitro precludes direct assessment of tumor cell killing via this method. Other responses in human subjects may also be measured. Some of the cited studies yielded clinical responses that could be measured via physical examination or radiologic study. This is the exception rather than the rule, however. Others have monitored the decrease in serum tumor markers such as PSA or CEA. But these may not correlate directly with tumor burden. Indirect calculation of tumor burden by using quantitative PCR to estimate the number of circulating tumor cells in peripheral blood may be promising in this regard. Despite the lack of consensus as to what constitutes an effective response, most would agree that monitoring of these patients should include measures of both immunologic response and clinical tumor effect. All of this leads to the conclusion that DC-based cancer vaccines have progressed a great deal but that much work still needs to be done. Only rigorous bench top experimentation followed by careful patient selection and vaccine administration, and then by meticulous patient monitoring, will lead to advances in the field."
12494901	"Preneoplastic lesions of the prostate-clinical, pathological and molecular biological aspects."	"Needle biopsy is the mainstay of definitive diagnosis of prostate cancer (PCA). While prostate-specific antigen (PSA) screening has facilitated early diagnosis of PCA, it has also resulted in an increase in the proportion of prostate biopsies showing various preneoplastic lesions (PNLs). At times such lesions are the sole finding in the limited amount of tissue available for assessment in an individual biopsy. Hence accurate identification of these lesions is important to avoid errors in the diagnosis of prostatic malignancy and in patient management. Furthermore, some interesting observations have been made regarding the molecular biological aspects of various PNLs during the last decade. In parallel with anatomic and physiological differences in various human races, racial differences have also been observed regarding the incidence of prostatic intra-epithelial neoplasia. This review focuses on prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia (PIN), atypical adenomatous hyperplasia (AAH) and atypical prostatic glands or atypical small acinar proliferation (ASAP) as putative preneoplastic lesions of the prostate. These lesions are reviewed with reference to their overall incidence, histopathological findings, histological differential diagnosis, clinical significance and molecular biological aspects."
12508244	High-resolution genomic profiling of occult micrometastatic tumor cells.	"Metastasis is responsible for most deaths from cancer. Currently, little is known about the early genetic events in the metastatic evolution. Here we describe the application of a newly developed strategy for an in-depth characterization of genomic changes in micrometastatic cells. Unique tumor cell lines were established from bone marrow of patients with cancer of the prostate and analyzed by multiplex-FISH (M-FISH) and array CGH. M-FISH revealed that the occult disseminated cells were characterized by very complex numerical and structural aberrations. Many of these aberrations resulted in chromosomal gains and losses, such as losses of 8p, 13q, and 18q and gains of 8q, 9q, 20, and the X chromosome, which are typically observed in prostate cancer. Array CGH allowed an unprecedented high-resolution assessment of copy number changes, pinpointing commonly gained or lost regions, which should narrow down the identification of regions critically involved in metastasis. Thus, occult micrometastatic cells are now amenable to detailed analyses of their genome. Markers for prognosis and treatment decisions can now be established."
12508640	[Mutation analysis of KLF6 gene in human nasopharyngeal carcinomas]	"BACKGROUND & OBJECTIVE: Nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) is one of the most common cancers in South China and Southeast Asia. The etiological factor is believed to be the interaction between genetic susceptibility, EBV infection and environmental factors, involved in the multi-step process of carcinogenesis and development of NPC. However, the molecular pathology of NPC is unclear yet. Kruppel-like factor 6(KLF6) is a ubiquitously expressed nuclear transcription factor, which is deleted and/or mutated with high frequency in a subset of prostate cancer. This study was designed to investigate KLF6 mutation in NPC tumors and NPC cell lines. METHODS: Genomic DNAs from 19 NPC tumor biospies and 3 NPC cell lines were used in mutation detection of KLF6 coding region and splice sites by PCR-sequencing. 100 chromosomes from 50 random healthy individuals were used as control. RESULTS: In 3 of 19 NPC tissues, 3 different mutations (Glu75Val, Ser136Arg, Arg243 Lys) in KLF6 gene were found by PCR-sequencing. None of the 3 mutations were detected in the 50 random healthy individuals. CONCLUSION: KLF6 gene may be involved in carcinogenesis of sporadic NPC."
12512146	[Mechanisms of prostate cancer recurrence]	"Androgen-deprivation therapy is often the first choice of several therapeutic procedures for advanced prostate cancer. However, despite an initial response to androgen-deprivation therapy, the cancer eventually progresses from an androgen-dependent to an androgen-independent phenotype. Molecular mechanism of development to androgen-independence and recurrence during androgen-deprivation therapy remain unclear. The observation that heterogeneity of AR expression in prostate cancer correlates with malignancy suggests that androgen responsiveness plays an important key role in the progression of prostate cancer. Therefore, it is very important to consider the role of AR and mechanisms of relapse when we treat androgen-independent prostate cancer."
12537669	Application of a yeast assay to detect functional p53 mutations in archival prostate cancer tissue.	"Detection and functional evaluation of mutant p53 alleles using a yeast assay could yield significant information for predicting the prognosis of patients with prostate cancer (CaP). Since the current version of this yeast assay is not applicable to archival tissues, we developed a modified assay for use on formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissue and have applied it to the study of patient samples. Using this modified assay, we examined archival CaP samples from 10 patients for mutations in exons 5-8 of p53 gene. Mutations were detected in four samples: three resulted in the formation of red yeast colonies indicating complete loss of function, while one gave pink yeast colonies, indicating that this mutant retained partial function. In parallel, we analyzed these samples for p53 abnormalities using a single-strand conformational polymorphism (SSCP) approach. Only three of the four yeast-positive samples gave abnormal SSCP bands. In each case where abnormal p53 was found by both methods, DNA sequencing revealed the identical base change. These results suggest that the modified yeast assay may be more sensitive than SSCP for detection of p53 mutations, and demonstrate that the modified method can be used to detect and evaluate the function of p53 mutants present in archival tissue."
12539229	R726L androgen receptor mutation is uncommon in prostate cancer families in the united states.	"BACKGROUND: A mutation in the androgen receptor (AR) gene, namely AR R726L, was described in 2% of Finnish men with sporadic or familial prostate cancer and was associated with an approximately sixfold increased risk of prostate cancer. We set out to determine the incidence of this mutation in a sample of men with either early-onset and/or familial prostate cancer in the United States. METHODS: Five hundred forty-eight men with prostate cancer from 411 unrelated families participating in the University of Michigan Prostate Cancer Genetics Project (PCGP) were studied. Allele-specific oligonucleotide hybridization was used to detect the presence of the AR R726L mutation in germline DNA. RESULTS: None of the 548 prostate cancer patients studied, including 513 White, 29 African American, 3 Asian, and 3 Hispanic men, were found to carry the AR R726L allele. Therefore, the prevalence of this allele is significantly less than that observed among Finnish men with prostate cancer (Fisher's exact test, P = 0.002). CONCLUSIONS: The AR R726L allele does not account for a significant proportion of early-onset and/or familial prostate cancer in the United States."
12550081	The role of insulin-like growth factor-II in cancer growth and progression evidenced by the use of ribozymes and prostate cancer progression models.	"Towards understanding the IGF system during cancer growth and progression, progressive prostate cancer models, such as SV40 large T antigen immortalized human prostate epithelial cells (P69, M2182, M2205, and M12) and LNCaP sublines (C4, C4-2, and C4-2B4), were used. IGF-II mRNA levels progressively increase as prostate cancer cells become more tumorigenic and metastatic, suggesting that IGF-II contributes in part to prostate cancer progression. The role of IGF-II in cancer cell growth was evaluated in LNCaP, PC3, and M12 prostate cancer cell lines and MCF-7 breast cancer cell line by ribozyme/antisense strategies which were previously shown to suppress endogenous IGF-II expression and cell growth in PC-3 cells [Xu et al., Endocrinol 140 (1999) 2134]. Retroviral mediated transient expression of IGF-II-specific ribozyme (RZ) caused extensive cell death. In stably cloned cell lines, both RZ and mutant ribozyme (MRZ) inhibited cancer cell growth, suggesting that antisense effects of MRZ may be sufficient for cell growth inhibition. These results confirm an important role of IGF-II in cancer cell growth and progression, and support further development of gene therapy targeting IGF-II."
12557230	Genetic markers useful for distinguishing between organ-confined and locally advanced prostate cancer.	"Prostate cancer is one of the most commonly diagnosed cancers and the second leading cause of cancer deaths among men in the United States. In this study, we performed comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) on 45 primary prostate adenocarcinomas to determine genetic markers that could be useful for distinguishing between organ-confined and locally advanced prostate cancer. Of these tumors, 24 were pT2 stage, 21 were pT3b; 20 had low Gleason scores (GS), 25 had high GS. The most common chromosomal alterations in all 45 tumors included losses on 8p (57.8%), 10q21-->qter (40.0%), 16q (35.6%), 11q21-->qter (28.9%), 16p (22.2%), 6q22-->24 (22.2%), 10p (20.0%), 5q31-->qter (17.8%), 6p (17.8%), 15q22-->qter (15.6%), and 17p (15.6%) as well as gains on 7cen-->p14 (20.0%), 7cen-->q22 (20.0%), and Xcen-->q21 (17.8%). Contingency table analysis showed that losses of 8p, 10q25-->qter, 6p21, 6q24-->qter, and 15q22-->qter were significantly increased in frequency (P < 0.05) with increasing stage and/or GS. A model was created following multivariate logistic regression analysis that was predictive of tumor stage in approximately 90% of the tumors studied. This model suggests that loss of 8p is the most valuable predictor of stage. These findings suggest that chromosomal regions identified in this study may be useful for distinguishing between organ-confined and locally advanced prostate tumors."
12581899	A novel tumorigenic human prostate epithelial cell line (M2205): molecular cytogenetic characterization demonstrates C-MYC amplification and jumping translocations.	"The paucity of cell lines from early-stage prostate cancer tumors has hindered the recognition of genetic and cellular changes that are associated with the acquisition of tumorigenesis. We describe the chromosomal complement of a novel tumorigenic prostate epithelial cell subline, called M2205, that acquired only three new, consistent chromosomal changes (from those present in the SV40T antigen immortalized parental cell line, P69SV40TAg) when it attained tumor-forming potential. The consistent changes, which were fully characterized using GTG-banding, CBG-banding, silver staining, fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH), comparative genomic hybridization (CGH), and spectral karyotyping (SKY), involved segmental jumping translocations and resulted in gains in the copy number of genes located on the distal long arm of chromosome 8 (8q22 to 8q24.3), including c-myc. Furthermore, the jumping translocations also resulted in ribosomal genes being present in multiple, tandem copies next to the chromatin from 8q. Given the relatively small number of cytogenetic changes present, this subline provides a means for better understanding the cellular changes associated with the acquired chromosomal imbalances. Further studies of this subline could also provide insight as to the mechanism or mechanisms leading to the formation of jumping translocations, as well as potential position effects resulting from the relocation of ribosomal genes next to other cellular genes or oncogenes."
12619157	Prostate cancer aggressiveness locus on chromosome segment 19q12-q13.1 identified by linkage and allelic imbalance studies.	"Whole-genome scan studies recently identified a locus on chromosome segments 19q12-q13.11 linked to prostate tumor aggressiveness by use of the Gleason score as a quantitative trait. We have now completed finer-scale linkage mapping across this region that confirmed and narrowed the candidate region to 2 cM, with a peak between markers D19S875 and D19S433. We also performed allelic imbalance (AI) studies across this region in primary prostate tumors from 52 patients unselected for family history or disease status. A high level of AI was observed, with the highest rates at markers D19S875 (56%) and D19S433 (60%). Furthermore, these two markers defined a smallest common region of AI of 0.8 Mb, with 15 (29%) prostate tumors displaying interstitial AI involving one or both markers. In addition, we noted a positive association between AI at marker D19S875 and extension of tumor beyond the margin (P = 0.02) as well as a higher Gleason score (P = 0.06). These data provide strong evidence that we have mapped a prostate tumor aggressiveness locus to chromosome segments 19q12-q13.11 that may play a role in both familial and non-familial forms of prostate cancer."
12642065	Prostate cancer epidemiology.	"Because more and more men are being diagnosed with prostate cancer worldwide, knowledge about and prevention of this disease is important. Epidemiological studies have provided some insight about the cause of prostate cancer in terms of diet and genetic factors. However, compared with other common cancers such as breast and lung cancer, the causes remain poorly understood. Several important issues could help in our understanding of this disease-the variation in incidence of prostate cancer between ethnic populations and the factors leading to familial clustering of the diseases."
12663286	"Lack of significant genotoxicity of purified soy isoflavones (genistein, daidzein, and glycitein) in 20 patients with prostate cancer."	"BACKGROUND: Genistein may be useful in the prevention or treatment of prostate cancer; however, it causes genetic damage in cultured human cells. OBJECTIVE: The objective was to assess the potential genotoxicity of a purified soy unconjugated isoflavone mixture in men with prostate cancer. DESIGN: Twenty patients with prostate cancer were treated with 300 mg genistein/d for 28 d and then with 600 mg/d for another 56 d. In peripheral lymphocytes, DNA strand breaks were assessed as nuclear tail moment, chromosomal damage was assessed as micronucleus frequency (MF), and translocations of the MLL gene (11q23) were assessed by using fluorescence in situ hybridization. Values are also reported for 6 healthy men. The studies were performed under Investigational New Drug application no. 54 137 at a tertiary referral academic medical center. RESULTS: No changes in group average or individual nuclear tail moment and MF were observed. We observed a single elevated MF value in one subject that exceeded a clinical threshold set before we initiated the study. A significant decrease in average COMET tail moment was observed on day 28 relative to day 0. We detected no genistein-induced rearrangements of the MLL gene in the 3 subjects we studied with this technique. MF increased significantly in lymphocytes exposed in vitro to unconjugated genistein at concentrations > or = 100 micromol/L. Total genistein never exceeded a peak concentration of 27.1 micro mol/L, and unconjugated genistein never exceeded a peak concentration of 0.32 micromol/L. CONCLUSION: Although isoflavones are capable of inducing genetic damage in vitro, a similar effect was not observed in subjects treated with a purified soy unconjugated isoflavone mixture."
12678401	Toward an understanding of the molecular genetics of prostate cancer progression.	"The study of the disease process of prostate cancer has revealed, over many years, numerous chromosomal and genetic alterations associated with the development and progression of this cancer. Although there is much information relating to prostate cancer at the molecular level, little is known as to how these alterations relate to each other. Also, a link between prostate cancer and its likely precursor lesions, such as prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia and atypical adenomatous hyperplasia, is not well established. This review aims to summarize current knowledge of the genetics of prostate cancer and its precursor lesions, with particular mention of the relatively new class of genes involved in the acquisition of the metastatic phenotype, the metastasis suppressor genes."
12697856	BRAF mutation in papillary thyroid carcinoma.	"The BRAF gene has been found to be activated by mutation in human cancers, predominantly in malignant melanoma. We tested 476 primary tumors, including 214 lung, 126 head and neck, 54 thyroid, 27 bladder, 38 cervical, and 17 prostate cancers, for the BRAF T1796A mutation by polymerase chain reaction (PCR)-restriction enzyme analysis of BRAF exon 15. In 24 (69%) of the 35 papillary thyroid carcinomas examined, we found a missense thymine (T)-->adenine (A) transversion at nucleotide 1796 in the BRAF gene (T1796A). The T1796A mutation was detected in four lung cancers and in six head and neck cancers but not in bladder, cervical, or prostate cancers. Our data suggest that activating BRAF mutations may be an important event in the development of papillary thyroid cancer."
12702592	Constitutive activation of the Ras/mitogen-activated protein kinase signaling pathway promotes androgen hypersensitivity in LNCaP prostate cancer cells.	"Progression of prostate cancer ultimately results in a disease that is refractory to hormone ablation therapy but nevertheless continues to require the androgen receptor. Progression to hormone refractory disease is often correlated with overexpression of growth factors and receptors capable of establishing autocrine and/or paracrine growth-stimulatory loops. Many of these growth factor receptors engage the Ras/mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase pathway as part of their signaling activities. This raises the possibility that chronic activation of Ras/MAP kinase signaling could cause or contribute to the progression of prostate cancer. We have demonstrated previously that MAP kinase activation correlates with the progression to advanced hormone refractory disease in patient samples. Here we demonstrate that stable expression of Ras effector-loop mutants that activate the Ras/MAP kinase pathway is sufficient to reduce the androgen requirement of LNCaP prostate cancer cells for growth, prostate-specific antigen expression, and tumorigenicity. We propose that chronic activation of endogenous c-Ras by autocrine and paracrine growth factor stimulation sensitizes the androgen receptor transcriptional complex to subphysiological levels of androgen. This provides a common mechanism for prostate cancer progression driven by diverse agonists."
12711671	A candidate prostate cancer susceptibility gene encodes tRNA 3' processing endoribonuclease.	"tRNA 3' processing endoribonuclease (3' tRNase) is an enzyme responsible for the removal of a 3' trailer from precursor tRNA (pre-tRNA). We purified approximately 85 kDa 3' tRNase from pig liver and determined its partial sequences. BLAST search of them suggested that the enzyme was the product of a candidate human prostate cancer susceptibility gene, ELAC2, the biological function of which was totally unknown. We cloned a human ELAC2 cDNA and expressed the ELAC2 protein in Escherichia coli. The recombinant ELAC2 was able to cleave human pre-tRNA(Arg) efficiently. The 3' tRNase activity of the yeast ortholog YKR079C was also observed. The C-terminal half of human ELAC2 was able to remove a 3' trailer from pre-tRNA(Arg), while the N-terminal half failed to do so. In the human genome exists a gene, ELAC1, which seems to correspond to the C-terminal half of 3' tRNase from ELAC2. We showed that human ELAC1 also has 3'-tRNase activity. Furthermore, we examined eight ELAC2 variants that seem to be associated with the occurrence of prostate cancer for 3'-tRNase activity. Seven ELAC2 variants which contain one to three amino acid substitutions showed efficient 3'-tRNase activities, while one truncated variant, which lacked a C-terminal half region, had no activity."
12759929	Haploinsufficiency and reduced expression of genes localized to the 8p chromosomal region in human prostate tumors.	"Cytogenetic and molecular studies have suggested that deletion or rearrangement of sequences that map to the short arm of chromosome 8 may be permissive for tumorigenesis in several organ systems, and in human prostate tumors in particular. In this study, we hypothesized that genes deleted for one copy and localized to the 8p chromosomal region may be transcriptionally down-regulated or ablated in affected human prostate tumor tissues. To test this hypothesis, we used cDNA microarray analysis to determine the transcriptional profiles for 259 transcribed sequences mapping to the 8p chromosomal region for seven human prostate tumor xenografts, completely characterized for numerical and structural alterations on chromosome 8, and five normal human prostate tissues. These experiments identified 33 genes differentially expressed between normal and malignant prostate tissues, the majority of which (28/33, 85%) were transcriptionally down-regulated in malignant compared to normal human prostate tissues. These findings, that haploinsufficiency and transcriptional down-regulation for genes mapping to 8p are largely coincident in human prostate tumors, should provide a powerful tool for the identification of tumor-suppressor genes associated with human prostate cancer initiation and progression."
12789288	PTEN signaling pathways in melanoma.	"Phosphatase and tensin homolog deleted in from chromosome ten (PTEN), initially also known as mutated in multiple advanced cancers or TGF-beta-regulated and epithelia cell-enriched phosphatase, is a tumor suppressor gene that is mutated in a large fraction of human melanomas. A broad variety of human cancers carry PTEN alterations, including glioblastomas, endometrial, breast, thyroid and prostate cancers. The PTEN protein has at least two biochemical functions: it has both lipid phosphatase and protein phosphatase activity. The lipid phosphatase activity of PTEN decreases intracellular PtdIns(3,4,5)P(3) level and downstream Akt activity. Cell-cycle progression is arrested at G1/S, mediated at least partially through the upregulation of the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p27. In addition, agonist-induced apoptosis is mediated by PTEN, through the upregulation of proapoptotic machinery involving caspases and BID, and the downregulation of antiapoptotic proteins such as Bcl2. The protein phosphatase activity of PTEN is apparently less central to its involvement in tumorigenesis. It is involved in the inhibition of focal adhesion formation, cell spreading and migration, as well as the inhibition of growth factor-stimulated MAPK signaling. Therefore, the combined effects of the loss of PTEN lipid and protein phosphatase activity may result in aberrant cell growth and escape from apoptosis, as well as abnormal cell spreading and migration. In melanoma, PTEN loss has been mostly observed as a late event, although a dose-dependent loss of PTEN protein and function has been implicated in early stages of tumorigenesis as well. In addition, loss of PTEN and oncogenic activation of RAS seem to occur in a reciprocal fashion, both of which could cooperate with CDKN2A loss in contribution to melanoma tumorigenesis."
12808114	Genetic evaluation of localized prostate cancer in a cohort of forty patients: gain of distal 8q discriminates between progressors and nonprogressors.	"Over-representation of sequences on chromosome 7 and 8 have been reported to be associated with aggressive behavior of prostate cancer. In this study we have performed a molecular cytogenetic survey by comparative genomic hybridization of a cohort of 40 prostate cancer patients, consisting of 20 progressors and 20 nonprogressors, after radical surgery for localized adenocarcinoma. Progression was defined as a biochemical relapse, ie, an elevation in prostate-specific antigen level in the serum. The mean follow-up after prostatectomy for the progressor group was 10.6 years, for the nonprogressor group, 9.1 years. Using comparative genomic hybridization, we found that progressors harbored on average more aberrations than nonprogressors. Gains were especially more prominent among progressors (p < 0.05), whereas a statistical trend was detected for losses (p = 0.10). As a consequence we examined all chromosome arms separately. The frequencies of loss for areas known to be frequently deleted in prostate cancer, such as 6q, 8p, or 13q, were not different between the two groups. A tendency was observed for more frequent gain on 3q in the progressor group (p = 0.09). However, gain of 8q (minimal overlapping region at 8q24-qter) was significantly more frequent in the progressor group (p = 0.04). This biomarker retained its significance when adjusted for the factors age, tumor grade, tumor stage, resection margin status, and preoperative prostate-specific antigen level. In conclusion we have created a map of genetic changes in progressive and nonprogressive prostatic carcinomas. Importantly, the presence of gain of distal 8q markedly reduced the progression-free survival, suggesting a clinical role for 8q gain in assessing the malignant potential of localized prostatic adenocarcinoma."
1282090	[Immunohistochemical and quantitative morphological studies of duct-acinar dysplasia in the prostate]	"A series of 56 cases of prostatic adenocarcinoma and 48 cases of benign prostate hyperplasia were studied with histochemical, immunohistochemical methods and Feulgen-Image Analysis Technique. Duct-acinar dysplasia (DAD) was found in 81.8% of the prostate adenocarcinoma cases collected, but only in 47.9% of the benign hyperplasia cases. The frequency and extent of disruption of basal cell layer increased coincidently with the progressive increase of DAD grading. Intraluminal acid mucin and metachromasia stained with toluidine blue around the acini were identified in DAD. Immunohistochemical staining for prostatic acid phosphatase, cytokeratin, vimentin and UEA-1 receptor changed in DAD cells. The nuclear areas, DNA content and ploidy, mean numbers of AgNOR in DAD cells were higher than those in benign hyperplasia of the prostates and lower than those in adenocarcinomas, which indicates the possession of premalignant behavior of prostatic carcinoma."
12837920	Molecular biology of prostate cancer.	"In spite of progress in diagnosis and treatment, prostate cancer has become one of the most frequent lethal cancers in males in many Western industrialized countries. Research on the molecular biology of prostate cancer is expected to reveal those aspects of Western lifestyle contributing to its high incidence with the aims of improving prevention, distinguishing slow-growing from aggressive clinically relevant cancers, and providing targets for treatment, particularly of locally advanced and of metastatic disease. Traditionally, prostate cancer research focused on androgens. More recently, tumour suppressors and proto-oncogenes important in other human cancers have been intensely investigated. Current approaches include the search for genes mutated in familial cases, identification of recurrent chromosomal alterations and their associated potential tumour suppressor genes, determination of gene expression profiles characterizing tumour stages and subclasses, and elucidation of the importance of epigenetic alterations. Results from such studies have begun to be translated into the clinic. Further successful transfer of results from molecular biology to the clinic will, however, require integration of the amassed molecular data into a biological framework model of prostate carcinoma."
12839931	Germ-line mutations of the macrophage scavenger receptor 1 gene: association with prostate cancer risk in African-American men.	"Both rare germ-line mutations and common sequence variants of the macrophage scavenger receptor 1 (MSR1) gene have recently been implicated as potential prostate cancer susceptibility factors. However, existing studies are limited by the referral-based nature of samples and a paucity of African-American participants. In this context, we evaluated the association of germ-line mutations and common MSR1 sequence variants with prostate cancer risk in a case control study of a community-based sample of 134 African-American men with prostate cancer and 340 unaffected controls. In our sample, the rare Asp174Tyr missense change was identified nearly twice as frequently in men with prostate cancer (6.8%) compared with unaffected controls (3.6%; P = 0.14). Moreover, significantly different allele frequencies between cases and controls were observed for one of the sequence variants, IVS5-59 (P = 0.02). Taken together, our results provide some additional support for the hypothesis that selected, rare MSR1 mutations are associated with increased prostate cancer susceptibility among African-American men."
12860943	Androgen receptor mutations in androgen-independent prostate cancer: Cancer and Leukemia Group B Study 9663.	"PURPOSE: The mechanisms responsible for prostate cancer androgen independence are diverse. Mutations of the androgen receptor (AR) gene that broaden ligand specificity have been implicated. Bone marrow specimens containing prostate tumor were obtained from men undergoing antiandrogen withdrawal for AR sequence analysis and clinical correlation. Materials and METHODS: Eligible men enrolled on a trial of antiandrogen withdrawal had a minimum prostate-specific antigen (PSA) level of 5 ng/dL that was increasing on castration therapy including an antiandrogen. With informed consent, marrow biopsies were obtained to collect prostate tumor. Additional samples were obtained from men enrolled on chemotherapy trials. AR cDNA or DNA was polymerase chain reaction-amplified, cloned, and sequenced. The AR CAG repeat length was recorded. RESULTS: One hundred eighty-four bone marrow biopsies were obtained, and 48 had prostate tumor detected by light microscopy. The ARs from these 48 samples were sequenced. Overall, five (10%) of 48 tumors had mutated ARs. AR point mutations were detected in the hormone-binding domain involved in transcription factor binding. Three mutations were novel in prostate cancer. One tumor sample had a CAG repeat length of 21, compared with germline length of 22 repeats. There was no association between detectability of AR mutations and antiandrogen withdrawal response or survival. CONCLUSION: These data suggest that AR mutations are present in approximately 10% of patients with prostate cancer who experience treatment failure with hormone therapy that included an antiandrogen. Mutations in the AR likely confer a growth advantage for a subset of progressive prostate cancers. Correlation of AR mutation with antiandrogen withdrawal response or survival could not be made."
12873978	Nkx3.1; Pten mutant mice develop invasive prostate adenocarcinoma and lymph node metastases.	"Recent studies have shown that several loss-of-function mouse models of prostate carcinogenesis can develop a spectrum of precancerous lesions that resemble human prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia (PIN). Here, we have investigated the malignant potential of the high-grade PIN lesions that form in Nkx3.1(+/-); Pten(+/-) compound mutant mice and demonstrate their neoplastic progression in a serial transplantation/tissue recombination assay. Furthermore, we find that a majority of Nkx3.1(+/-); Pten(+/-) mice greater than 1 year of age develop invasive adenocarcinoma, which is frequently accompanied by metastases to lymph nodes. Finally, we observe androgen independence of high-grade PIN lesions after androgen ablation of Nkx3.1(+/-); Pten(+/-) mice. We conclude that Nkx3.1(+/-); Pten(+/-) mice recapitulate key features of advanced prostate cancer and represent a useful model for investigating associated molecular mechanisms and for evaluating therapeutic approaches."
12900420	Alleviating the suppression of glycogen synthase kinase-3beta by Akt leads to the phosphorylation of cAMP-response element-binding protein and its transactivation in intact cell nuclei.	"Glycogen synthase kinase-3beta (GSK-3beta) activity is suppressed when it becomes phosphorylated on serine 9 by protein kinase B (Akt). To determine how GSK-3beta activity opposes Akt function we used various methods to alleviate GSK-3beta suppression in prostate carcinoma cells. In some experiments, LY294002, a specific inhibitor of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (a kinase involved in activating Akt) and tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha) were used to activate GSK-3beta. In other experiments mutant forms of GSK-3beta, GSK-3betadelta9 (a constitutively active deletion mutant of GSK-3beta) and GSK-3betaY216F (an inactive point mutant of GSK-3beta) were used to alter GSK-3beta activity. LY294002, TNF-alpha, and overexpression of wild-type GSK-3beta or of GSK-3betadelta9, but not GSK-3betaY216F, alleviated the suppression of GSK-3beta activity in prostate carcinoma cells and enhanced the turnover of beta-catenin. Forced expression of wild-type GSK-3beta or of GSK-3betadelta9, but not GSK-3betaY216F, suppressed cell growth and showed that the phosphorylation status of GSK-3beta can affect its intracellular distribution. When transcription factors activator protein-1 and cyclic AMP-response element (CRE)-binding protein were analyzed as targets of GSK-3beta activity, overexpression of wild-type GSK-3beta suppressed AP1-mediated transcription and activated CRE-mediated transcription. Overexpression of GSK-3betadelta9 caused an (80-fold) increase in CRE-mediated transcription, which was further amplified (up to 130-fold) by combining GSK-3betadelta9 overexpression with the suppression of Jun activity. This study also demonstrated for the first time that expression of constitutively active GSK-3betadelta9 results in the phosphorylation of CRE-binding protein on serine 129 and enhancement of CRE-mediated transcription in intact cell nuclei."
12915880	Role of genetic polymorphisms of the RNASEL gene on familial prostate cancer risk in a Japanese population.	"The RNASEL gene on chromosome 1q25 has been identified as a prostate cancer susceptibility gene. We screened for RNASEL germline mutations in familial prostate cancer patients, and performed a case-control study to examine the association of specific variants with prostate cancer risk in the Japanese. Three variants within the RNASEL gene, G282A, G1385A and T1623G were identified. G1385 and T1623G variants result in previously reported Arg462Gln and Asp541Glu variants, respectively. The novel G282A variant does not cause amino-acid substitution. A case-control study consisting of 101 familial prostate cancer cases and 105 noncancer controls showed that the Gln/Gln genotype of codon462 was observed in 7.6% of controls. However, the Gln/Gln genotype was not observed in cases, and reduced prostate cancer risk (odds ratio (OR)=0.061, P=0.014). The Asp/Asp genotype of codon541 increased the familial prostate cancer risk (OR=7.37, P=0.0004). In subset analysis, a significant association was observed in patients with more than two affected members (OR=3.15, P=0.028), and weak associations were found in patients with metastatic disease (OR=2.40, P=0.11) and high-grade disease (Gleason score >or=7) (OR=3.07, P=0.14). These findings suggested that the polymorphic changes within the RNASEL gene may be associated with familial prostate cancer risk in a Japanese population."
12930568	Male reproductive function and the human Y chromosome: is selection acting on the Y?	"The human Y chromosome encodes genes that are essential for male sex determination, spermatogenesis and protection against Turner stigmata. In recent years mutations have been identified in Y-chromosome genes associated with these phenotypes and a series of microdeletions of the long arm of the Y have been defined that are specifically associated with male infertility. In parallel, the discovery of polymorphic markers on the Y, comprising of both slow-mutating binary markers and rapidly-mutating microsatellites, has enabled the high resolution definition of a large number of paternal lineages (haplogroups). These Y-chromosome haplogroups have been extensively used to trace population movements and understand human origins and histories, but recently a growing number of association studies have been performed aimed at assessing the relationship between the Y-chromosome background and Y-linked phenotypes such as infertility and male-specific cancers. These preliminary studies, comparing haplogroup distributions between case and control populations, are promising and suggest an association between different Y-chromosome lineages, sperm counts and prostate cancer. However, we highlight the need to extend these studies to other world populations. Increased sample numbers and a better haplogroup resolution using additional binary markers in association studies are necessary. By these approaches novel associations between Y-chromosome haplotypes and disease may be revealed and the degree to which selection is acting on the human Y chromosome may be determined."
12941794	Genome-wide loss of heterozygosity analysis from laser capture microdissected prostate cancer using single nucleotide polymorphic allele (SNP) arrays and a novel bioinformatics platform dChipSNP.	"Oligonucleotide arrays that detect single nucleotide polymorphisms were used to generate genome-wide loss of heterozygosity (LOH) maps from laser capture microdissected paraffin-embedded samples using as little as 5 ng of DNA. The allele detection rate from such samples was comparable with that obtained with standard amounts of DNA prepared from frozen tissues. A novel informatics platform, dChipSNP, was used to automate the definition of statistically valid regions of LOH, assign LOH genotypes to prostate cancer samples, and organize by hierarchical clustering prostate cancers based on the pattern of LOH. This organizational strategy revealed apparently distinct genetic subsets of prostate cancer."
12958598	No association of germline alteration of MSR1 with prostate cancer risk.	"The macrophage scavenger receptor 1 gene (MSR1) was recently identified as a candidate susceptibility gene for hereditary prostate cancer and as a risk factor for sporadic prostate cancer. To confirm these findings, we screened MSR1 for germline mutations among individuals with familial prostate cancer and tested gene variants for associations in both sporadic and familial prostate cancer. Our results do not support MSR1 as a risk factor for prostate cancer."
1309581	Human papillomavirus types 16 and 18 are not involved in human prostate carcinogenesis: analysis of archival human prostate cancer specimens by differential polymerase chain reaction.	"Human papilloma viruses (HPV) have been implicated in the pathogenesis of a variety of malignancies, especially in carcinomas of the female genital tract. Recently, based on observations using the polymerase chain reaction amplification assay, HPV types 16 and 18 specific DNA sequences have been detected in prostate cancer specimens obtained by transurethral resection. Since HPV types 16 and 18 have been shown to possess oncogenic potential, an association between HPV infection and prostatic carcinoma has been suggested. In order to exclude potentially HPV-colonized urethral mucosa from analysis and restrict our study to predominantly malignant tissue, cancerous areas from a series of 30 paraffin-embedded prostate adenocarcinomas were microdissected and analyzed for the presence of HPV 16 or HPV 18 specific sequences by a modification of PCR (D-PCR) and Southern blot analysis. Despite the high sensitivity of our analytical technique, we found no evidence of HPV-DNA of either type in any of the 30 primary prostate cancers. In contrast, both HPV 16 (2/8 specimens) and HPV 18 (2/8 specimens) DNA was detected in randomly chosen cervical carcinomas using the D-PCR methodology. Our data would indicate that the oncogenic HPV-types 16 and 18 are unlikely effectors of prostate carcinogenesis."
1347085	Alterations of the P53 gene are associated with the progression of a human prostate carcinoma.	"P53 is a tumor suppressor gene that has been implicated in the molecular genetics of many human malignancies. Nucleotide alterations, most commonly single point mutations, have been shown not only to abrogate the p53 suppressor function but also to contribute to the transformed phenotype. We report the detection of a p53 gene mutation in clinical specimens of a patient with relapsing prostate adenocarcinoma 14 years after definitive external beam radiation. The techniques of single strand conformation polymorphism analysis and direct sequencing of polymerase chain reaction generated products were used for this study. Analysis of tissue from different locations of the primary tumor revealed intratumoral molecular heterogeneity; the mutation was absent in 1 area but present in another. Tumor from a regional lymph node metastasis harbored the identical p53 mutation. Furthermore, an additional genetic alteration, an allelic loss on chromosome 17p but not including the p53 gene, was observed only in the metastatic tissue. These observations in clinical specimens of primary and metastatic sites provide evidence for the association of the p53 gene in the progression of human prostate carcinoma."
1350643	"Small subgroup of aggressive, highly proliferative prostatic carcinomas defined by p53 accumulation."	"BACKGROUND: Mutations in the p53 gene resulting in the accumulation of altered p53 proteins with prolonged half-life have been found in a large variety of human malignancies. PURPOSE: We studied the significance of p53 protein accumulation in prostatic carcinoma. METHODS: The material consisted of 137 paraffin-embedded, primary prostatic carcinomas. Accumulation of p53 protein was studied by immunohistochemical staining using a polyclonal p53-specific CM-1 antibody. Proliferation activity was determined by DNA flow cytometry and by immunohistochemical detection of proliferative cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) using a monoclonal PC10 antibody. RESULTS: Eight (6%) of the tumors showed intense p53 staining in more than 20% of the tumor cells, 15 (11%) had only lower level immunoreactivity, and 114 (83%) showed no staining. High-level p53 accumulation was associated with high histologic grade (P less than .001), DNA aneuploidy (P less than .05), and high cell proliferation rate as defined by flow cytometric S-phase analysis (P less than .01) or PCNA expression (P less than .01). High-level p53 accumulation predicted short, progression-free interval (P less than .01) and poor survival (P less than .001), with about a 12-fold relative risk of death as compared with p53-negative cases. Low-level p53 accumulation had no prognostic significance. CONCLUSIONS: Accumulation of p53 confers proliferative advantage for prostatic carcinoma cells and defines a small subgroup of highly malignant carcinomas."
14501770	Androgen receptors in prostate cancer.	"PURPOSE: Androgen receptor (AR) is expressed in the majority of human prostate cancers. For a better understanding of prostate carcinoma events it is necessary to present findings on the regulation of AR target genes, AR interaction with associated proteins, ligand independent activation and point mutations. MATERIALS AND METHODS: A comprehensive literature review of manuscripts published on AR in prostate cancer was performed using PubMed. RESULTS: AR regulates the expression of genes involved in the proliferation and differentiation of prostate cancer cells. Due to differential interactions with coactivators and corepressors AR activation results in the stimulation of a mitogenic response or in the expression of secretory proteins. AR is functional in advanced carcinoma of the prostate, as evidenced in studies of mutant receptors and ligand independent activation. AR point mutations appear in advanced prostate cancer more frequently than in organ confined disease. CONCLUSIONS: Current therapy options aimed to inhibit AR function in prostate cancer are limited. Antiandrogenic drugs frequently acquire agonistic properties in the presence of mutated ARs. In addition, androgen signaling pathway activity increases during long-term androgen ablation. AR coactivator complexes might be a target for novel therapies for prostate cancer."
14522913	Aberrant HOXC expression accompanies the malignant phenotype in human prostate.	"Dysregulation of HOX gene expression has been implicated as a factor in malignancies for a number of years. However, no consensus has emerged regarding specific causative genes. Using a degenerate reverse transcription-PCR technique, we show up-regulation of genes from the HOXC cluster in malignant prostate cell lines and lymph node metastases. When relative expression levels of the four HOX clusters were examined, lymph node metastases and cell lines derived from lymph node metastases exhibited very similar patterns, patterns distinct from those in benign cells or malignant cell lines derived from other tumor sites. Specific reverse transcription-PCR for HOXC4, HOXC5, HOXC6, and HOXC8 confirmed overexpression of these genes in malignant cell lines and lymph node metastases. Laser capture microdissection and examination of paired tumor/normal prostate epithelial cells also indicated overexpression of these HOXC genes in primary tumor cells. Our data indicate a possible link between expression of HOXC genes and malignancy in prostate cells. Overexpression of HOXC8 in LNCaP prostate cancer cells suppressed transactivation by androgen receptors. We speculate that HOXC overexpression may predispose tumor cells to androgen independence by necessitating adaptation to diminished androgen signaling."
14562033	Unique induction of p21(WAF1/CIP1)expression by vinorelbine in androgen-independent prostate cancer cells.	"To study the mechanisms of the development of hormone refractory prostate cancer, we established an androgen-independent (AI) prostate cancer cell line derived from hormone-dependent (AD) LNCaP cells. Our previous studies have demonstrated that AI cells are deficient in expression of p21(WAFl/CIP1) (p21) due to overexpressed AR and are resistant to apoptosis. In this study, the induction of p53 and p21 expression by vinorelbine (Navelbine) was compared between AD and AI cells in an attempt to understand the difference(s) in apoptotic signalling pathways in these cells. Using a series of deletion of p21 reporter constructs, we found that vinorelbine mediated p21 induction in a p53-dependent manner in AD cells. In contrast, p21 expression restored by vinorelbine in AI cells was found to be through both p53-dependent and-independent pathways. In the absence of two p53 binding sites, Spl-3 and Spl-4 sites, in the promoter of human p21 gene, were found to be required for vinorelbine-mediated p21 activation. No p21 induction was observed by paclitaxel in AI cells. Exposure of AI cells to paciltaxel followed by vinorelbine produced synergism. Our data, thus, provide a basis for the synergistic combination of vinorelbine and paclitaxel for the treatment of advanced prostate cancer."
14571418	Hsp90 as a therapeutic target in prostate cancer.	"Prostate cancers are hormone-dependent malignancies that respond to drugs that reduce circulating testosterone levels or prevent binding of this ligand to the androgen receptor (AR). While effective, these approaches are not curative and, in almost all cases, progression to a castration-resistant state is eventually observed. The mechanisms underlying the development of hormone resistance are poorly defined but several molecular changes are commonly associated with this process. Since a common element of these resistance mechanisms is restoration of AR signaling, agents that target AR expression represent an attractive treatment option for prostate cancer patients with disease progression following castration. Prior to ligand binding, AR exists in a complex with heat shock protein 90 (Hsp90) and other co-chaperones. The AR-Hsp90 interaction maintains AR in a high-affinity ligand-binding conformation, which is necessary for efficient response to hormone. 17-Allyamino-17-demethoxygeldanamycin (17-AAG) is an inhibitor of the Hsp90 chaperone protein. Inhibition of Hsp90 function causes the proteasomal degradation of proteins that require this chaperone for maturation or stability. Hsp90 clients include several proteins of potential importance in mediating prostate cancer progression, including wild-type and mutated AR, HER2, and Akt. In murine models of prostate cancer, 17-AAG causes the degradation of these client proteins at nontoxic doses and inhibits the growth of hormone-naive and castration-resistant tumors. These data suggest that inhibitors of Hsp90 may represent a novel strategy for the treatment of patients with prostate cancer and clinical trials to test this hypothesis are currently ongoing."
14578468	G3139 (oblimersen) may inhibit prostate cancer cell growth in a partially bis-CpG-dependent non-antisense manner.	"G3139 is an 18-mer phosphorothioate oligodeoxyribonucleotide, which is targeted to the initiation codon region of the bcl-2mRNA. Although treatment of PC3 prostate cancer cells with G3139, which contains two CpG motifs, causes a dramatic decrease in bcl-2 protein expression after 3 days, it did not result in significant cellular apoptosis, as it does in many other cell lines. The absence of apoptosis was demonstrated by the absence of pro-caspase 3 cleavage products and of Annexin V cell surface expression. In addition, ATP production and the mitochondrial membrane potential DeltaPsim were preserved. Despite this, G3139 significantly inhibited the rate of cellular proliferation in complete media and blocked cloning in soft agar. G4232, a variant of G3139 that down-regulates bcl-2 expression to the same extent but has both CpG cytidines C5 methylated, was only minimally antiproliferative. A series of mismatched G3139-related oligomers were synthesized that could also substantially down-regulate bcl-2 protein expression, but only if the CpG motifs were preserved, demonstrating the presence of additional non-antisense mechanisms. G3139 caused production of reactive oxygen species in growth-arrested cells and oxidation of nuclear guanosine to 8-hydroxy-2'-deoxyguanosine, as determined by 1F7 monoclonal antibody staining. Bromodeoxyuridine incorporation studies demonstrated that G3139 induced a G1-S entry block and an intra-S-phase block in PC3 cells that persisted as long as 3 days. This finding coincides with the observation that expression of several proteins encoded by S-phase genes, including c-myb and poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase, were significantly reduced. These results illustrate the complexity of the mechanism of action of G3139 in PC3 cells."
14581372	Exisulind and related compounds inhibit expression and function of the androgen receptor in human prostate cancer cells.	"In recent studies, we found that sulindac sulfide (SS), exisulind, CP248, and CP461 induce growth inhibition and apoptosis in a series of human prostate cancer cell lines, irrespective of cyclooxygenase expression, p53 mutations, or bcl-2 overexpression. Exisulind also inhibited the growth of the androgen-dependent LNCaP human prostate cancer cell line when grown as a xenograft in nude mice. This study demonstrates that doses of these compounds that induce growth inhibition and apoptosis in LNCaP cells also cause decreased prostate-specific antigen (PSA) secretion and decreased cellular levels of PSA. These effects appear to be a result, at least in part, of inhibition of the androgen receptor (AR) signaling pathway because the treated cells also display decreases in the level of the AR protein and mRNA and inhibition of transcription of an AR promoter luciferase reporter in transient transfection assays. SS and exisulind were more effective in inhibiting the expression of PSA and the AR than CP248 or CP461, apparently because of differential effects of these compounds on specific transcription factors. These findings suggest that the growth inhibition by these compounds in human prostate cancer cells may be mediated, in part, by inhibition of AR signaling. Thus, these compounds may provide a novel approach to the prevention and treatment of human prostate cancer."
14597895	[Bladder tumors and molecular markers. Current status and perspectives]	"With 15,000 new cases each year, bladder tumors are the second leading urological cancer in France, after prostate carcinoma. In spite of advances in surgical techniques and therapeutic protocols based on trans-urethral resection associated with additive treatment (immunotherapy or endovesical chemotherapy), the natural course of superficial bladder tumors remains marked by two risks: recurrence and progression. In spite of the impressive efforts developed by molecular biologists searching for new specific markers, none of the markers can currently replace histological features such as stage and grade. Although detection of microsatellite instability is a promising approach, numerous difficulties limit the use of these markers and prevent their application in routine practice. Let us hope that the new techniques for tissue analysis such as DNA or tissue-arrays developed for simultaneous analysis of hundreds or even thousands of tumors will allow identification and validation of biological and even therapeutic markers. Among the various biological markers, only the proliferative index given by the expression of Ki67, the expression of p53 and EGFR have been examined in comparative studies. Ki67 seems to be the best marker for progression, its expression and the interpretation of results being more reproducible than for p53."
14603436	RAD21 and KIAA0196 at 8q24 are amplified and overexpressed in prostate cancer.	"To detect genes that are overexpressed in prostate cancer, a subtracted cDNA library was first constructed from the PC-3 cell line and subsequently screened by using cDNA microarray hybridization. Sixty-eight genes were found to be overexpressed (ratio>3) in PC-3. Half of these genes were in chromosomal regions, which, using comparative genomic hybridization, we previously showed to be gained in PC-3. Subsequently, the expression and copy number of selected genes were studied by quantitative RT-PCR and fluorescence in situ hybridization in prostate cancer cell lines, xenografts, and clinical tumor specimens of benign prostate hyperplasia and untreated as well as hormone-refractory prostate carcinomas. Two genes from chromosomal region 8q24-RAD21 and KIAA0196-showed increased expression in clinical prostate carcinomas and were also amplified in 30-40% of xenografts and hormone-refractory tumors. In addition, the expression of KIAA0196 was significantly (P=0.0051) higher in tumors with the gene amplification than in those without it. The data suggest that KIAA0196 and possibly RAD21 are putative target genes for the common amplification of 8q23-24 in prostate cancer."
14608035	Haploinsufficiency of Anx7 tumor suppressor gene and consequent genomic instability promotes tumorigenesis in the Anx7(+/-) mouse.	"Annexin 7 (ANX7) acts as a tumor suppressor gene in prostate cancer, where loss of heterozygosity and reduction of ANX7 protein expression is associated with aggressive metastatic tumors. To investigate the mechanism by which this gene controls tumor development, we have developed an Anx7(+/-) knockout mouse. As hypothesized, the Anx7(+/-) mouse has a cancer-prone phenotype. The emerging tumors express low levels of Anx7 protein. Nonetheless, the wild-type Anx7 allele is detectable in laser-capture microdissection-derived tumor tissue cells. Genome array analysis of hepatocellular carcinoma tissue indicates that the Anx7(+/-) genotype is accompanied by profound reductions of expression of several other tumor suppressor genes, DNA repair genes, and apoptosis-related genes. In situ analysis by tissue imprinting from chromosomes in the primary tumor and spectral karyotyping analysis of derived cell lines identify chromosomal instability and clonal chromosomal aberrations. Furthermore, whereas 23% of the mutant mice develop spontaneous neoplasms, all mice exhibit growth anomalies, including gender-specific gigantism and organomegaly. We conclude that haploinsufficiency of Anx7 expression appears to drive disease progression to cancer because of genomic instability through a discrete signaling pathway involving other tumor suppressor genes, DNA-repair genes, and apoptosis-related genes."
14614009	Gene amplifications associated with the development of hormone-resistant prostate cancer.	"PURPOSE: Hormone resistance remains a significant clinical problem in prostate cancer with few therapeutic options. Research into mechanisms of hormone resistance is essential. EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: We analyzed 38 paired (prehormone/posthormone resistance) prostate cancer samples using the Vysis GenoSensor. Archival microdissected tumor DNA was extracted, amplified, labeled, and hybridized to Amplionc I DNA microarrays containing 57 oncogenes. RESULTS: Genetic instability increased during progression from hormone-sensitive to hormone-resistant cancer (P = 0.008). Amplification frequencies of 15 genes (TERC, MYBL3, HRAS, PI3KCA, JUNB, LAMC2, RAF1, MYC, GARP, SAS, FGFR1, PGY1, MYCL1, MYB, FGR) increased by >10% during hormone escape. Receptor tyrosine kinases were amplified in 73% of cases; this was unrelated to development of hormone resistance. However, downstream receptor tyrosine kinase signaling pathways showed increased amplification rates in resistant tumors for the mitogen-activated protein kinase (FGR/Src-2, HRAS, and RAF1; P = 0.005) and phosphatidylinositol 3'-kinase pathways (FGR/Src-2, PI3K, and Akt; P = 0.046). Transcription factors regulated by these pathways were also more frequently amplified after escape (MYC family: 21% before versus 63% after, P = 0.027; MYB family: 26% before versus 53% after, P = 0.18). CONCLUSIONS: Development of clinical hormone escape is linked to phosphatidylinositol 3'-kinase and mitogen-activated protein kinase pathways. These pathways may function independently of the androgen receptor or via androgen receptor activation by phosphorylation, providing novel therapeutic targets."
14638851	Promotion of tumorigenesis by heterozygous disruption of the beclin 1 autophagy gene.	"Malignant cells often display defects in autophagy, an evolutionarily conserved pathway for degrading long-lived proteins and cytoplasmic organelles. However, as yet, there is no genetic evidence for a role of autophagy genes in tumor suppression. The beclin 1 autophagy gene is monoallelically deleted in 40-75% of cases of human sporadic breast, ovarian, and prostate cancer. Therefore, we used a targeted mutant mouse model to test the hypothesis that monoallelic deletion of beclin 1 promotes tumorigenesis. Here we show that heterozygous disruption of beclin 1 increases the frequency of spontaneous malignancies and accelerates the development of hepatitis B virus-induced premalignant lesions. Molecular analyses of tumors in beclin 1 heterozygous mice show that the remaining wild-type allele is neither mutated nor silenced. Furthermore, beclin 1 heterozygous disruption results in increased cellular proliferation and reduced autophagy in vivo. These findings demonstrate that beclin 1 is a haplo-insufficient tumor-suppressor gene and provide genetic evidence that autophagy is a novel mechanism of cell-growth control and tumor suppression. Thus, mutation of beclin 1 or other autophagy genes may contribute to the pathogenesis of human cancers."
14639658	EGF- and cell-cycle-regulated STAG1/PMEPA1/ERG1.2 belongs to a conserved gene family and is overexpressed and amplified in breast and ovarian cancer.	"The abnormal activation of the epidermal growth factor (EGF) pathway is one of the most common findings in human cancer, and a number of molecular devices of laboratory and clinical relevance have been designed to block this transduction pathway. Because of the large number of cellular events that might be regulated through the activation of the four EGF receptor family members, it is possible that screening methodologies for the identification of new molecular targets working downstream of these pathways may provide new tools for cancer diagnosis and potentially prevention and therapy. In searching for EGF target genes, we have identified ERG1.2, the mouse homolog of the solid tumor-associated gene STAG1. Both in humans and in mice, it belongs to a new gene family that can give origin to several protein isoforms through alternative splicing and/or multiple translation starts. Sequence analysis and experimental data suggest that ERG1.2 is likely to function as a membrane-bound protein interacting with downstream signaling molecules through WW- and SH3-binding domains. ERG1.2 is a cell-cycle-regulated gene, and both ERG1.2 and STAG1 are induced by EGF and other growth factors at the transcript and protein levels. Finally, we have demonstrated that, besides prostate cancer and renal cell carcinoma, STAG1 was also overexpressed in breast and ovarian cancer cell lines and in breast primary tumors. Although in most cases STAG1 overexpression is probably due to the abnormal activation of the EGF pathway, we have also demonstrated genetic amplification and rearrangement of its locus in one breast cancer cell line and one primary ovarian cancer, suggesting that STAG1 might be a direct molecular target in the carcinogenetic process. Thus its overexpression might be regarded not only as a tumor marker but also as a potentially pathogenetic event."
14662770	Epidermal growth factor increases coactivation of the androgen receptor in recurrent prostate cancer.	"Growth of normal and neoplastic prostate is mediated by the androgen receptor (AR), a ligand-dependent transcription factor activated by high affinity androgen binding. The AR is highly expressed in recurrent prostate cancer cells that proliferate despite reduced circulating androgen. In this report, we show that epidermal growth factor (EGF) increases androgen-dependent AR transactivation in the recurrent prostate cancer cell line CWR-R1 through a mechanism that involves a post-transcriptional increase in the p160 coactivator transcriptional intermediary factor 2/glucocorticoid receptor interacting protein 1 (TIF2/GRIP1). Site-specific mutagenesis and selective MAPK inhibitors linked the EGF-induced increase in AR transactivation to phosphorylation of TIF2/GRIP1. EGF signaling increased the coimmunoprecipitation of TIF2 and AR. AR transactivation and its stimulation by EGF were reduced by small interfering RNA inhibition of TIF2/GRIP1 expression. The data indicate that EGF signaling through MAPK increases TIF2/GRIP1 coactivation of AR transactivation in recurrent prostate cancer."
14691534	Pten dose dictates cancer progression in the prostate.	"Complete inactivation of the PTEN tumor suppressor gene is extremely common in advanced cancer, including prostate cancer (CaP). However, one PTEN allele is already lost in the vast majority of CaPs at presentation. To determine the consequence of PTEN dose variations on cancer progression, we have generated by homologous recombination a hypomorphic Pten mouse mutant series with decreasing Pten activity: Pten(hy/+) > Pten(+/-) > Pten(hy/-) (mutants in which we have rescued the embryonic lethality due to complete Pten inactivation) > Pten prostate conditional knockout (Pten(pc)) mutants. In addition, we have generated and comparatively analyzed two distinct Pten(pc) mutants in which Pten is inactivated focally or throughout the entire prostatic epithelium. We find that the extent of Pten inactivation dictate in an exquisite dose-dependent fashion CaP progression, its incidence, latency, and biology. The dose of Pten affects key downstream targets such as Akt, p27(Kip1), mTOR, and FOXO3. Our results provide conclusive genetic support for the notion that PTEN is haploinsufficient in tumor suppression and that its dose is a key determinant in cancer progression."
1469508	Histological preservation after in situ hybridization to archival solid tumour sections allows discrimination of cells bearing numerical chromosome changes.	"In this study, non-isotopic in situ hybridization (ISH) was used for the cytogenetic and histological examination of urological (prostatic adenocarcinoma) and endocrine (phaeochromocytoma) tumour cell nuclei in 4 microns paraffin-embedded tissue sections. In order to investigate preservation of tissue morphology, standard heat denaturation was compared with a mild enzymatic treatment for the production of single-stranded (ss)-DNA for ISH. Numerical analysis by ISH with chromosome-specific repetitive DNA probes for chromosomes 1, 7, and 11 revealed overrepresentation of chromosome 7 in the phaeochromocytoma (P < 0.01). The constitutional underrepresentation of the Y chromosome was easily detected in the prostate tumour (P << 0.01) when probed for chromosomes 7, 16, and Y. The enzymatic treatment appeared superior to heat denaturation with respect to tissue architecture in the phaeochromocytoma, while no clear difference was observed in the prostatic cancer. ISH probe patterns were similar for the two types of denaturation in both tumours (P > or = 0.20). We conclude that (1) ISH can be used for the identification of numerical cytogenetic changes in solid tumour cell nuclei within archival tissue sections; and (2) mild 'denaturation' protocols, replacing heat, are preference in retaining tissue architecture in fragile tumour specimens."
14710354	Activation of pro-apoptotic p38-MAPK pathway in the prostate cancer cell line M12 expressing a truncated IGF-IR.	"The type I insulin-like growth factor receptor (IGF-IR) plays a critical role in signaling survival and proliferation in many cell types. Activation of IGF-IR by its ligands promotes cell proliferation via mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) cascade and cell survival via phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K) cascade. The IGF-IR emerges as a powerful growth factor for many tumor cells. A truncated IGF-IR 486/STOP, described as a dominant negative IGF-IR mutant, was shown to induce apoptosis and inhibit tumor growth in vivo while endogenous IGF-IR was activated. To investigate the mechanism(s) of the action of 486/STOP, we have introduced 486/STOP into the prostate tumor model cell line M12 and its derivative M12lisn that expresses high levels of wild type IGF-IR. We have found that 486/STOP induces apoptosis in M12 and M12lisn cells in culture and that 486/STOP acts through activation of the pro-apoptotic p38-MAPK without interfering with wild type IGF-IR activation. In addition, our results have indicated that 486/STOP induced activation of p38-MAPK increases through activation of endogenous IGF-IR. These data suggest that activation of the IGF-IR by 486/STOP can selectively enhance the previously reported IGF-IR pro-apoptotic signaling pathways."
14732919	Loss of a small region around the PTEN locus is a major chromosome 10 alteration in prostate cancer xenografts and cell lines.	"We examined 11 prostate cancer xenografts and 4 cell lines for chromosome 10 alterations. Conventional comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) and array-based CGH revealed a pattern of loss of distal 10p, gain of proximal 10p and 10q, and loss of distal 10q. In addition, array CGH identified 2 high-level amplifications in the cell line PC3, homozygous deletions of PTEN in PC3 and in the xenografts PCEW, PC133, and PC324, and small single- or double-copy deletions around PTEN in PCEW, PC82, PC324, PC346, and LNCaP. Allelotype analysis confirmed all 10p losses, 5 of 6 large 10q losses, the homozygous deletions, and the small regions of one copy loss. MXI1, DMBT1, and KLF6 were excluded as important tumor-suppressor genes. The sizes of homozygous deletions around PTEN ranged from 1.2 Mbp (PC133) to <30 kbp (PTEN exon 5 in PC295). The regions of small single- or double-copy loss around PTEN were all less than 4.5 Mbp. The loss of 1 or 2 copies of PTEN was always accompanied by loss of the distal flanking gene FLJ11218 and, in most cases, by loss of the proximal flanking genes MINPP1, PAPSS2, and FLJ14600. Furthermore, differential expression was detected for FLJ11218 and PAPSS2. Complete deletion or inactivating mutation of PAPSS2 was found in at least 3 samples. In addition to 4 homozygous deletions, 1 missense mutation was detected in FLJ11218. In conclusion, our data provide evidence that loss of a small region around PTEN is the major chromosome 10 alteration in prostate cancer xenografts and cell lines. In some of the samples, PTEN inactivation was accompanied by loss of 1 MINPP1 allele, loss of 1 copy, mutation, or low expression of PAPSS2, and most frequently by loss of 1 or 2 copies or low expression of FLJ11218."
14744261	Differential modulation of androgen receptor transcriptional activity by the nuclear receptor co-repressor (N-CoR).	"Antiandrogens are widely used agents in the treatment of prostate cancer, as inhibitors of AR (androgen receptor) action. Although the precise mechanism of antiandrogen action is not yet elucidated, recent studies indicate the involvement of nuclear receptor co-repressors. In the present study, the regulation of AR transcriptional activity by N-CoR (nuclear receptor co-repressor), in the presence of different ligands, has been investigated. Increasing levels of N-CoR differentially affected the transcriptional activity of AR occupied with either agonistic or antagonistic ligands. Small amounts of co-transfected N-CoR repressed CPA (cyproterone acetate)- and mifepristone (RU486)-mediated AR activity, but did not affect agonist (R1881)-induced AR activity. Larger amounts of co-transfected N-CoR repressed AR activity for all ligands, and converted the partial agonists CPA and RU486 into strong AR antagonists. In the presence of the agonist R1881, co-expression of the p160 co-activator TIF2 (transcriptional intermediary factor 2) relieved N-CoR repression up to control levels. However, in the presence of RU486 and CPA, TIF2 did not functionally compete with N-CoR, suggesting that antagonist-bound AR has a preference for N-CoR. The AR mutation T877A (Thr877-->Ala), which is frequently found in prostate cancer and affects the ligand-induced conformational change of the AR, considerably reduced the repressive action of N-CoR. The agonistic activities of CPA- and hydroxyflutamide-occupied T877A-AR were hardly affected by N-CoR, whereas TIF2 strongly enhanced their activities. These results indicate that lack of N-CoR action allows these antiandrogens to act as strong agonists on the mutant AR."
14752525	Molecular genetics of human prostate cancer.	"Multiple factors contribute to the high incidence and prevalence of prostate cancer including race, ethnicity, diet, environment, widespread awareness through prostate-specific antigen screening and genetics. Linkage analysis has identified several candidate sites for hereditary prostate cancer gene loci. Molecular studies have also identified genes that are frequently altered in sporadic prostate cancer. It appears that due to the heterogeneity of prostate cancer, multiple genes may be involved in the neoplastic process."
14761658	Age-specific acceleration of cancer.	"One of the great challenges of cancer research is to explain the epidemiological patterns of cancer incidence based on the molecular processes that lead to uncontrolled cellular proliferation. The epidemiological data demonstrate that the age-specific incidence of many cancers increases in an approximately linear way with age when plotted on a log-log scale, with different slopes for different cancers. However, those epidemiological data also show that cancers of various tissues depart from log-log linearity in particular ways. Here, I illustrate those departures from log-log linearity by introducing plots of the age-specific acceleration of cancer. I then develop a very general model of cancer progression, which I use to explain the observed differences between tissues in age-specific acceleration. In one application of the model, I show that the spectacular rise and fall in age-specific acceleration observed in prostate cancer may be explained by multiple rounds of clonal expansion. In a second application, I demonstrate that the steady decline in age-specific acceleration of breast cancer may occur because precancerous mutations accumulate in many cellular lineages."
14973119	NBS1 is a prostate cancer susceptibility gene.	"To evaluate whether an inactivating mutation in the gene for the Nijmegen breakage syndrome (NBS1) plays a role in the etiology of prostate cancer, we compared the prevalence of the 657del5 NBS1 founder allele in 56 patients with familial prostate cancer, 305 patients with nonfamilial prostate cancer, and 1500 control subjects from Poland. Loss of heterozygosity analysis also was performed on DNA samples isolated from 17 microdissected prostate cancers, including 8 from carriers of the 657del5 mutation. The NBS1 founder mutation was present in 5 of 56 (9%) patients with familial prostate cancer (odds ratio, 16; P < 0.0001), 7 of 305 (2.2%) patients with nonfamilial prostate cancer (odds ratio, 3.9; P = 0.01), and 9 of 1500 control subjects (0.6%). The wild-type NBS1 allele was lost in seven of eight prostate tumors from carriers of the 657del5 allele, but loss of heterozygosity was seen in only one of nine tumors from noncarriers (P = 0.003). These findings suggest that heterozygous carriers of the NBS1 founder mutation exhibit increased susceptibility to prostate cancer and that the cancers that develop in the prostates of carriers are functionally homozygous for the mutation."
14979203	[Analysis of loss of heterozygosity on chromosome 8 in human prostate carcinoma and high grade prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia]	"OBJECTIVE: To detect the status of loss of heterozygosity (LOH) on chromosome 8 in prostate carcinoma and high grade prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia (PIN). METHODS: Pure DNA was obtained from prostate neoplasms and normal tissues by tissue microdissection. LOH on chromosome 8 was detected by PCR based microsatellite polymorphism analysis technique using 14 pairs of microsatellite primers in 10 samples of prostate carcinoma and 10 samples of high grade PIN. RESULTS: There were different frequencies of LOH on chromosome 8 in 10 samples of prostate carcinoma. 8p23.1-p23.2 and 8p21-p22 were two high-frequency LOH regions. LOH on chromosome 8 was detected in 3 samples of high grade PIN. CONCLUSIONS: There were high-frequency LOH regions on chromosome 8 of prostate carcinoma, located on 8p23.1-p23.2 and 8p21-p22. High grade PIN and prostate carcinoma share the same allelic loss on 8p. Tumor suppressor genes located at these two regions may be potentially involved in the initiation and progression of prostate carcinoma."
14989489	Classification of prostatic carcinoma with artificial neural networks using comparative genomic hybridization and quantitative stereological data.	"Staging of prostate cancer is a mainstay of treatment decisions and prognostication. In the present study, 50 pT2N0 and 28 pT3N0 prostatic adenocarcinomas were characterized by Gleason grading, comparative genomic hybridization (CGH), and histological texture analysis based on principles of stereology and stochastic geometry. The cases were classified by learning vector quantization and support vector machines. The quality of classification was tested by cross-validation. Correct prediction of stage from primary tumor data was possible with an accuracy of 74-80% from different data sets. The accuracy of prediction was similar when the Gleason score was used as input variable, when stereological data were used, or when a combination of CGH data and stereological data was used. The results of classification by learning vector quantization were slightly better than those by support vector machines. A method is briefly sketched by which training of neural networks can be adapted to unequal sample sizes per class. Progression from pT2 to pT3 prostate cancer is correlated with complex changes of the epithelial cells in terms of volume fraction, of surface area, and of second-order stereological properties. Genetically, this progression is accompanied by a significant global increase in losses and gains of DNA, and specifically by increased numerical aberrations on chromosome arms 1q, 7p, and 8p."
14991865	Genetic aberrations in prostate carcinoma detected by comparative genomic hybridization and microsatellite analysis: association with progression and angiogenesis.	"BACKGROUND: In spite of increasing knowledge about the tumor biology of prostate cancer (PC), molecular events involved in tumor progression are not well characterized. There is evidence that a number of genetic alterations play a role in tumor progression and in addition, angiogenesis also contributes. In this study, comparative genomic hybridization (CGH), a sensitive method for detecting regional DNA copy number abnormalities, and microsatellite analysis was used to identify frequent genome changes in PC. Correlation of these data with microvessel density (MVD) and clinical follow-up data was performed to determine genetic alterations that are associated with angiogenesis and subsequent tumor progression. METHODS: Fifty-seven paraffin embedded radical prostatectomy (RP) specimens were microdissected. DNA from the microdissected PC tissue was amplified by degenerate oligonucleoitide primed (DOP)-polymerase chain reaction (PCR), and CGH was performed on the PCR product. Quantitative analyses of the CGH profiles were performed using a t-statistic. Additionally, a microsatellite analysis of chromosome 13q was performed on a subgroup of 31 of the tumors. Using a polyclonal antibody against factor VIII, MVD was determined for all RP specimens. The results of CGH and microsatellite analysis were correlated with the clinical data of the patients and with MVD. RESULTS: Forty-two of the tumors (75%) showed one or more gains while 39 (70%) showed one or more losses per tumor. The most frequent DNA copy number gains were on chromosome 3, 4, 7, 8, 10, 11, 12, 13, and X. The most frequent losses were on chromosomes 2, 5, 6, 8, 10, 13, 15, and 16. Cancer recurrence occurred in 15 patients. The total number of DNA copy number losses was significantly higher in patients with this progression (86%) than without (52%) (P < 0.001). There was no significant difference in the number of gains in patients with or without progression. Contingency table analysis showed a significant correlation between progression and losses in regions of chromosomes 6q and 13q and a gain of chromosome 7q. In multivariate analysis, only loss of chromosome 6 was independently prognostic. The gains that correlated most closely with MVD > 35 were on chromosomes 2q, 7q, and Xq, while the losses most closely associated with MVD > 35 were on chromosomes 8q, 10q, and 13q. However, only the association between loss of chromosome 13q and MVD > 35 was statistically significant. Microsatellite analysis revealed a statistically significant correlation between MVD and instability of locus 171. CONCLUSIONS: This study indicates that the frequency of genetic alterations in PC as detected by CGH correlates with clinical outcome, and that losses of DNA from chromosomes 6q and 13q are important events that correlate with tumor progression, with loss of 13q, especially instability of locus 171, also associated with angiogenesis."
14991866	Gain of androgen receptor gene copies in primary prostate cancer due to X chromosome polysomy.	"BACKGROUND: Prostate cancer is an androgen dependent tumor. In advanced prostate cancers androgen deprivation has proved to be an effective therapy, but 25% show no response. In this study prostatectomy specimens from patients without preoperative therapy were analyzed to determine the possible mechanism of primary antiandrogen resistance. METHODS: The number of androgen receptor (AR) gene copies and X-centromeres were investigated from 80 prostate cancer specimens by FISH analysis. RESULTS: In 9 out of 80 prostate cancers additional X-chromosomes with the corresponding AR gene could be detected. Polysomy of the X-chromosome correlates with pathological classification and tumor volume. CONCLUSIONS: Additional AR genes due to polysomy of the X-chromosome are present in a subgroup of primary prostate cancers prior to antiandrogen therapy. Because the growth of prostate cancers is androgen dependent, these specimens may have an advantage in low concentrations of androgens. This may be a factor for initial antiandrogen resistance."
15054816	Blastic mantle cell lymphoma developing concurrently in a patient with chronic myelogenous leukemia and a review of the literature.	"Non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (NHL) occurring as a synchronous malignancy with chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML) is rare. To our knowledge, this is the first case reported of a patient who developed mantle cell lymphoma (MCL) after therapy with imatinib mesylate for CML. After a 3-year history of CML, the patient developed a lymphocytosis associated with diarrhea, anorexia, and weight loss. Imaging studies revealed abdominal adenopathy and extensive lymphomatous infiltration of the liver, stomach, pancreas, and kidneys. Flow cytometric and cytogenetic studies were consistent with MCL. Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) of the bone marrow revealed a genetically distinct lymphoid neoplasm rather than an extramedullary blast crisis of CML. The development of lung cancer, prostate cancer, CML and MCL in this patient suggests a genetic predisposition, although other factors, including environmental exposures and therapy with imatinib mesylate could have had a contributory or synergistic role in the development of MCL."
15057748	Kruppel-like factor 6 (KLF6) is a tumor-suppressor gene frequently inactivated in colorectal cancer.	"BACKGROUND & AIMS: Kruppel-like factor 6 (KLF6) is a ubiquitous zinc finger tumor suppressor that is often mutated in prostate cancer. Our aims were to establish the frequency of KLF6 inactivation in sporadic and inflammatory bowel disease (IBD)-associated colorectal cancers (CRC); to correlate these abnormalities with mutation and/or loss of TP53, APC, and K-RAS; and to characterize the behavior of mutant KLF6 in colon-derived cell lines. METHODS: We analyzed DNA isolated from 50 microdissected CRC cases, including 35 sporadic and 15 IBD-associated tumors. Microsatellite analysis and direct sequencing were used to establish the incidence of microsatellite instability, KLF6 and TP53 allelic imbalance, and KLF6, K-RAS, TP53, and APC mutation. Loss of growth suppressive function of the CRC-derived KLF6 mutants was characterized by in vitro thymidine incorporation assays and Western blotting. RESULTS: KLF6 was inactivated by loss and/or mutation in most sporadic and IBD-related CRCs. The KLF6 locus was deleted in at least 55% of tumors, and mutations were identified in 44%. Rates of KLF6 loss and mutation were similar to those of TP53 and K-RAS in the same samples. KLF6 mutations were present in tumors with either microsatellite or chromosomal instability and were more common, particularly in the IBD-related cancers, in the presence of wild-type APC. Unlike wild-type KLF6, cancer-derived KLF6 mutants neither suppressed growth nor induced p21 following transfection into cultured cells. CONCLUSIONS: Deregulation of KLF6 by a combination of allelic imbalance and mutation may play a role in the development of CRC."
15112041	[Necessity and usefulness of bioinformatic methods for microarray data analysis]	"Data emerging from DNA microarray experiments are usually difficult to interpret. While the level of expression of several thousand genes can be measured in a single experiment, only a few dozen experiments are normally carried out, leading to data sets of very high dimensionality and low cardinality. The computational analysis of gene expression data makes significant usage of machine learning and statistical methods. Nevertheless, caution should be used in the blind adoption of these methods, as this usually leads to an over-interpretation of the expression profiles. The following presentation provides an overview of up-to-date principles of biostatistical analysis. A potential application for the analysis of high-dimensional expression profiles of prostate cancer is given."
15156193	Androgen receptor level controlled by a suppressor complex lost in an androgen-independent prostate cancer cell line.	"Androgen receptor (AR) overexpression is one of the characteristics of prostate cancer (PC) that progresses to hormone independence. An androgen-independent (AI) derivative, with much higher AR-mRNA and protein levels than the parental LNCaP cell line, whose proliferation was androgen dependent (AD), was used to explore the mechanism of AR overexpression. We found that a suppressor element (ARS), previously identified in mouse AR and located in the 5'-untranslated region of human AR gene, malfunctions in AI cells. Transfection of constructs that included ARS element into AD cells reduced the transactivating activities of both AR promoter and a heterologous SV40 promoter. The deletion of ARS resulted in an eightfold increase in AR-promoter activity in AD cells, but had no effect in AI cells. Moreover, the nuclear extracts of AD cells contained proteins that produced a specific, ARS-binding complex, while this complex appeared to have been lost from AI cells. Most importantly, treatment of AI cells with a demethylating agent or histone deacetylase inhibitors restored the lost ARS-binding complex. The restoration of the complex coincided with a reduced expression of AR-mRNA and protein and a reduced rate of AR-gene transcription, determined by nuclear run-on experiment. Thus, epigenetic transcriptional silencing of the suppressor protein(s) may be responsible for AR overexpression in AI cells, and its reversal in hormone-independent PC may normalize AR levels and restore their hormone dependence."
1516067	Expression of the cellular adhesion molecule E-cadherin is reduced or absent in high-grade prostate cancer.	"E-cadherin is a Ca(2+)-dependent cell adhesion molecule which plays an important role in normal growth and development via mediation of homotypic, homophilic cell-cell interaction. Recent studies suggest that E-cadherin may be important in neoplastic progression as well, particularly as a suppressor of invasion. We have previously demonstrated that the invasive phenotype of rat prostate cancer cells is associated with the decreased expression of E-cadherin (M. J. G. Bussemakers, R. J. A. Van Moorselaar, L. A. Giroldi, T. Ichikawa, J. T. Isaacs, F. M. J. Debruyne, and J. A. Schalken, Cancer Res., 52:2916-2922, 1992). This is of particular interest, since the locus to which the human E-cadherin gene is mapped is frequently involved in allelic loss in prostate cancer (B. S. Carter, C. M. Ewing, W. S. Ward, B. F. Treiger, T. W. Aalders, J. A. Schalken, J. I. Epstein, and W. B. Isaacs, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 87:8751-8755, 1990; U. S. Bergerheim, K. Kunimi, V. P. Collins, and P. Ekman, Genes, Chromosomes Cancer, 3: 215-220, 1991). Impaired E-cadherin function is likely to be associated with aberrant expression of the protein. We therefore analyzed E-cadherin expression in situ by immunohistochemistry in nonmalignant and malignant specimens of human prostatic tissue. Of 92 tumor samples of either primary or metastatic deposits of prostate cancer, 46 had reduced or absent E-cadherin staining when compared to nomalignant prostate, which uniformly stained strongly positive. There was a statistically significant correlation between the decreased expression of E-cadherin and loss of tumor differentiation. Additionally, certain tumors within a histologically similar group could be distinguished by the presence of mixed populations of E-cadherin-negative and -positive cells. The percentage of tumors with aberrant E-cadherin staining increased when clinically localized tumors were compared to either tumors with extensive local progression or metastatic deposits of prostate cancer, suggesting a correlation between loss of E-cadherin and tumor progression. Taken together, these findings suggest that further exploration of E-cadherin as a candidate invasion suppressor molecule in human prostate cancer is warranted."
15161318	In treating localized prostate cancer the efficacy of cryoablation is independent of DNA ploidy type.	"While the prognostic value of DNA ploidy has been well established for radical prostatectomy, external beam radiation, brachytherapy and androgen deprivation therapy its role as a survival outcome predictor for prostate cancer patients treated with cryoablation has not yet been examined. Anecdotal evidence suggesting that cryoablation may be independent of DNA ploidy type led to the implementation of the current study. Retrospective analysis of data including flow digital cytometry was performed on 447 archival specimens taken from patients who had undergone cryosurgical ablation of primary prostate cancer. Five-year biochemical disease free survivals (bDFS) (defined as PSA thresholds of 0.5 and 1.0 ng/ml) were determined with Kaplan-Meier analysis. Patients were grouped according to DNA ploidy types then stratified by Gleason grade, risk group, pre-surgical PSA level, and disease stage. Mean and median age of the cohort was 65 and 64.6 years. Mean follow-up was 65.7 months. The DNA ploidy status of the population was found to be 59% diploid, 13% tetraploid, and 28% aneuploid. Using PSA < 1.0 ng/ml criterion, the bDFS rates for diploid, tetraploid, and aneuploid were 78%, 75%, and 79% respectively. The bDFS rates using a PSA < 0.5 ng/ml criterion were 67%, 59%, and 69% for diploid, tetraploid, and aneuploid groups. No significant outcome differences were found in stratified analysis. This investigation demonstrates that the efficacy of cryoablation is independent of DNA ploidy type."
15185141	Interaction effect of PTEN and CDKN1B chromosomal regions on prostate cancer linkage.	"The tumor suppressor functions of PTEN and CDKN1B have been extensively characterized. Recent data from mouse models suggest that, for some organs, the combined action of both PTEN and CDKN1B has a stronger tumor suppressor function than each alone; for the prostate, heterozygous knockout of both genes leads to 100% penetrance for prostate cancer. To assess whether such an interaction contributes to an increased risk of prostate cancer in humans, we performed a series of epistatic PTEN and CDKN1B interaction analyses in a collection of 188 high-risk hereditary prostate cancer families. Two different analytical approaches were performed; a nonparametric linkage (NPL) regression analysis that simultaneously models allele sharing at these two regions in all families, and an ordered subset analysis (OSA) that assesses linkage evidence at a target region in a subset of families based on the magnitude of allele sharing at the reference region. The strongest evidence of interaction effect was observed at 10q23-24 and 12p11-13 from both the NPL regression analysis (P = 0.0002) in all families and the OSA analyses in subsets of families. A LOD-delta of 3.15 (P = 0.01) was observed at 10q23-24 among 54 families with the highest NPL scores at 12p11-13, and a LOD-delta of 2.63 (P = 0.02) was observed at 12p11-13 among 34 families with the highest NPL scores at 10q23-24. The evidence for the interaction was stronger when using additional fine-mapping markers in the PTEN (10q23) and CDKN1B (12p13) regions. Our data are consistent with epistatic interactions between the PTEN and CDKN1B genes affecting risk for prostate cancer and demonstrate the utility of modeling epistatic effects in linkage analysis to detect susceptibility genes of complex diseases."
15202013	Apoptosis in prostate cancer: progressive and therapeutic implications (Review).	"Prostate cancer is the most common non-cutaneous malignancy in American men and the second greatest cause of cancer-related death. Development of effective therapeutic modalities for the treatment of this cancer relies heavily on understanding the molecular alterations that result in the initiation and progression of the tumorigenic process. Increasing evidence indicates that impaired ability to undergo apoptosis plays an important role in the evolution from androgen-dependent to androgen-independent prostate cancer. In this review, we address recent progress toward the central objectives of understanding the molecular events that contribute to prostate cancer progression. We focus on some key regulatory molecules, including the pro-apoptotic regulators p53, PTEN, caspases and Par-4, and the anti-apoptotic molecules Bcl-2, NF-kappaB and Akt, to discuss their roles in prostate cancer progression and their therapeutic implications in human prostate carcinoma."
15247715	Kruppel-like factor 6 germ-line mutations are infrequent in Finnish hereditary prostate cancer.	"PURPOSE: Recently, Kruppel-like factor 6 gene (KLF6) has been shown to be inactivated in up to 77% of prostate carcinomas. KLF6 has an important role in regulating cell growth and differentiation. The function and high mutation frequency in sporadic prostate carcinomas make KLF6 an attractive candidate for prostate cancer predisposition and, therefore, DNA samples from 69 Finnish prostate cancer families were analyzed for KLF6 mutations. MATERIALS AND METHODS: DNA samples from 69 Finnish prostate cancer families were screened for mutations in the KLF6 gene using single-strand conformation polymorphism analysis and confirmatory sequencing. RESULTS: In 8 (11.6%) families single-strand conformation polymorphism shifts were present. Sequencing revealed 6 201G>A (R201R) polymorphisms, as well as a -4C>A and a 956T>C alteration in the 5'- and 3'-untranslated regions, respectively. Nonsense or missense mutations were not found. CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest that KLF6 germ-line mutations are of marginal importance in prostate cancer predisposition in Finland."
15249132	"Steroid hormonal regulation of growth, prostate specific antigen secretion, and transcription mediated by the mutated androgen receptor in CWR22Rv1 human prostate carcinoma cells."	"CWR22Rv1 (22Rv1) is an androgen-responsive human prostate carcinoma cell line derived from a primary prostate tumor that expresses mutant (H874Y) androgen receptors (AR) and secretes low levels of prostate specific antigen (PSA). In this study, we examined the effects of various androgens and other steroid hormones on proliferation of 22Rv1 cells, PSA secretion, and transactivation. Incubation of 22Rv1 cells with various concentrations of testosterone resulted in a dose-dependent 50-80% increase in growth over 72 h. PSA release and transactivation of PRE2-tk-LUC in 22Rv1 cells were stimulated by low concentrations of natural and synthetic androgens (EC(50)s = 10(-10) to 10(-9)M) and a broad range of other classes of steroid hormones, albeit with lower potency. Uniform positive immunocytochemical staining was observed in 22Rv1 cell nuclei with mouse monoclonal antibodies to human AR. Competitive binding assays indicated that the mutant AR in 22Rv1 cytosol is more promiscuous than a wild-type AR (ARLBD: rat AR ligand binding domain). Testosterone (10(-8)M)-induced PSA release and transactivation were blocked by both antiandrogens and antiprogestins with IC(50)s of 10(-7) to 10(-6)M. At high concentration (10(-6)M), these antagonists showed partial agonist activity in terms of PSA secretion but not transactivation. In conclusion, the mutant AR in 22Rv1 cells binds and responds to low levels of androgens and a wide spectrum of other natural and synthetic steroid hormones, mechanisms proposed to contribute to tumor progression following androgen ablation."
1526198	DNA ploidy in cell nuclei from paraffin-embedded material--comparison of results from two laboratories.	"In 49 pairs of contiguous sections from paraffin-embedded prostatic cancer tissue, the DNA indices (DIs) were determined by flow cytometry (FCM) at 2 different laboratories. In 3 of 45 pairs of evaluable nuclear suspensions, DIs of 1.1 (DNA aneuploid) were found at Laboratory 1, whereas all 3 tumours were classified as DNA diploid at Laboratory 2. In the remaining 42 specimens, the correlation between the DIs was excellent, though the application of strictly defined DNA ploidy ranges led to different DNA ploidy allocation in 3 cases. It is concluded that in 85-90% of the cases, reliable DIs can be obtained by FCM done in paraffin-embedded material at different laboratories. Slight technical variations and interpretation differences may lead to different ploidy allocation in 10-15% of the cases."
15262429	DNA sequence copy number aberrations in prostate cancers: a comparison of comparative genomic hybridization data between Japan and European countries.	"Incidence of prostate cancer in Japan and resultant mortality rates are lower than in Western countries. To elucidate the reasons behind this, the genetic characteristics of prostate cancer in Japanese patients were investigated. Comparative genomic hybridization was applied in 27 cases of prostate cancers in Japanese patients. Frequent gains were found at Xq, 8q, Xp, and 7q and frequent losses at 8p, 6q, 2q, 16q, and 17p (in decreasing order of frequency). Loss of 6q was frequently detected in both early and advanced tumors. Gains of 7q and 8q and loss of 8p were more frequent in advanced than early tumors. The frequency of 13q loss in primary tumors was significantly lower in patients in Japan than in European countries. These data suggest that a loss of 6q is associated with the development of prostate cancer, and that gains of 7q and 8q and a loss of 8p are linked with cancer progression. The frequency of 13q loss may imply differences in biological behavior of prostate cancer between Japan and Western countries."
15287096	Surgical margin and Gleason score as predictors of postoperative recurrence in prostate cancer with or without chromosome 8p allelic imbalance.	"BACKGROUND: Identification of prostate cancer patients at risk for postoperative disease recurrence is an important clinical issue. Existing pathological markers can predict disease recurrence only to a certain extent, and there is a need for more accurate predictors. METHODS: Using ""counting alleles,"" a novel experimental method, we determined allelic status of chromosome 8p in 107 prostatectomy specimens. Statistical analyses examined the association between pathologic predictors (Gleason score, stage, surgical margin, etc.) and cancer recurrence in patients with and without 8p allelic imbalance (8p AI). RESULTS: 8p AI cancers were more likely to recur in the presence of a positive surgical margin, whereas recurrence of 8p retaining tumors was associated with the Gleason score, but not with the surgical margin. CONCLUSIONS: Our findings suggest that chromosome 8p allelic status affects the predictive value of ""traditional"" markers of prostate cancer recurrence. If confirmed by larger studies, these results may have important clinical implications."
15291877	Fluorescence in situ hybridization analysis of matched primary tumour and lymph-node metastasis of D1 (pT2-3pN1M0) prostate cancer.	"OBJECTIVE: To describe the chromosomal numerical changes present in primary prostate tumours and their matched lymph-node metastases, to identify a clonal cell migration process which could account for the metastatic behaviour. MATERIALS AND METHODS: Twenty-eight cases of unsuspected stage D1 (pT2-3pN1M0) prostate cancer were detected among patients who had a radical prostatectomy for clinically localized prostate cancer. Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH), using centromeric probes to enumerate chromosomes 7, 8, 10 and 12, was used to assess numerical chromosomal changes. FISH analysis was used on isolated nuclei obtained from matched primary tumours and their lymph node metastases. RESULTS: Of the 28 suitable cases it was possible to complete the study in 18 pairs of matched tissues; the remainder were excluded because of insufficient tissue or poor preservation of at least one of the tissues. There was cytogenetic change (aneuploidy) in 16 of the 18 primary tumours, the most common being monosomy 8, detected in 14, followed by trisomy 7, in 13 aneuploid tumours. All lymph node metastases were aneuploid by FISH. As in the primary tumours, monosomy 8 and trisomy 7 were the most common cytogenetic alterations, in 13 and 15 of the lymph node tissues. FISH analysis showed a high correlation (83%) in the cytogenetic pattern of changes between the primary tumours and their lymph node metastases. Moreover, a similar number of cells had the most common aneusomies when comparing prostate and the lymph node tissues. CONCLUSIONS: These results show a similar pattern of cytogenetic alteration in the primary tumour and its lymph node metastasis, characterized by the frequent presence of trisomy 7 and monosomy 8, suggesting that clonal cell selection is not involved in the metastatic process."
15298146	Prognostic factors in prostate cancer.	"The ability of traditional and newer molecular-based prognostic factors to predict the outcome of prostate cancer is of considerable interest to urologists, pathologists, and patients. In this review, a series of traditional and newer molecular-based prognostic factors are considered, including those that have achieved widespread use, newer tests that are beginning to be used in clinical practice, and emerging molecular markers that have yet to be widely validated in the published literature or clinical trials."
15305342	Molecular analysis of WFDC1/ps20 gene in prostate cancer.	"BACKGROUND: WFDC1/ps20 protein has been previously established as a growth suppressor of the prostate cancer cell line PC3. It maps to chromosome 16q23.1, a region of frequent loss of heterozygosity, familial association, and genomic loss in prostate cancer. We, therefore, chose to examine WFDC1/ps20 for mutations and expression changes in prostate cancer. METHODS: DNA from 21 prostate cancer patients and 5 prostate cancer cell lines was screened for mutations in the WFDC1/ps20 gene by sequencing PCR products of each exon. An SphI polymorphism in the 5' UTR was screened in 23 tumors, 22 normal adjacent prostate tissue samples, and 35 control DNAs. Expression of WFDC1/ps20 in different tissue types was examined by Northern blot and by PCR across a multi-tissue cDNA panel. Expression patterns of WFDC1/ps20 in primary tumors were examined by full-length RT-PCR and products were cloned and sequenced to identify novel splice forms. Quantitative RT-PCR analysis of WFDC1/ps20 was performed in a separate cohort of matched tumor/benign tissues. RESULTS: No tumor-associated mutations were identified in the coding region of WFDC1/ps20. A novel polymorphism was found in exon 6 in DNA from cell lines, tumors, and normal adjacent benign tissue. A novel splice form completely deleted for exon 3 was found in tumor and normal prostate RNA. Quantitative RT-PCR demonstrated significant down regulation of WFDC1/ps20 in prostate tumors. Subdivision of normal tissue into stromal and epithelial compartments showed that WFDC1/ps20 expression correlates exponentially with the amount of stroma present. CONCLUSIONS: WFDC1/ps20 is down regulated but not frequently mutated in prostate cancer. It is expressed predominantly in the normal stroma of the prostate. We, therefore, propose that WFDC1/ps20 may not be a classical tumor suppressor gene, but might play a role in the maintenance of the normal extra cellular matrix milieu in the prostate."
15316697	Effect of anti-estrogens on the androgen receptor activity and cell proliferation in prostate cancer cells.	"Although some anti-estrogens have been reported to inhibit the proliferation of prostate cancer cells, few studies on the mechanism by which they suppress the growth of prostate cancer have been reported. We investigated, for the first time, whether anti-estrogens modulate the transactivation activity of the androgen receptor (AR) in prostate cancer cells. In DU-145 cells transfected with AR, the transactivation activity of AR was inhibited by tamoxifen and toremifene, even in the presence of 10 nM of DHT. On the other hand, in LNCaP cells having an endogenous AR mutation at codon 877, the activity of AR was suppressed by faslodex in the presence of 10 nM DHT, whereas it was not inhibited by tamoxifen nor toremifene. In PC-3 cells, both the cell growth and the AR activity were remarkably inhibited by tamoxifen at 50 microM. Faslodex and toremifene inhibited AR activity to some extent, but they seemed to function as agonists at higher concentrations. In PC-3 cells, the inhibition of cell growth by flutamide, faslodex and toremifene was much less than their suppression of AR activity. We also demonstrated that a synthetic estrogen diethylstilbestrol and progesterone-related drugs such as chlormadinone acetate and allylestrenol dose-dependently inhibited the activity of AR in DU-145 and PC-3 cells. These results highlight the anti-androgenic aspect of anti-estrogens and estrogens in regard to the AR-mediated transcription of the relevant genes in prostate cancer."
15326487	Identification and characterization of somatic steroid 5alpha-reductase (SRD5A2) mutations in human prostate cancer tissue.	"Prostate cancer is a very common disease in industrialized countries and it is known to be androgen-dependent. The human SRD5A2 gene encodes the prostatic (or type II) steroid 5alpha-reductase, which catalyses the irreversible conversion of testosterone to dihydrotestosterone (DHT), the most active androgen in the prostate. We have sequenced the entire protein-coding region of this locus in 30 microdissected prostate adenocarcinomas. We identified a total of 17 de novo amino-acid substitutions in 13 of these tumors. We also identified six additional silent substitutions. In total, 18 out of 30 (60%) of the tumors examined had de novo somatic substitutions in the prostatic steroid 5alpha-reductase-coding region. We also characterized all of the SRD5A2 missense substitutions biochemically and pharmacologically, using three 5alpha-reductase inhibitors, including finasteride. The biochemical parameters of the distinct 5alpha-reductase missense substitutions varied substantially. We note that two out of the three recurrent SRD5A2 missense substitutions increased 5alpha-reductase in vitro activity, while the third one is essentially neutral. These findings are consistent with a role for increased DHT levels in the prostate through increased activity of the SRD5A2 locus in prostate cancer progression, in a subset of patients. Our pharmacologic studies also reveal substantial variability for each 5alpha-reductase inhibitor. These data, therefore, should be taken into account in both prevention as well as therapeutic trials of prostate cancer utilizing 5alpha-reductase inhibitors."
15350180	Potentiation of androgen receptor transcriptional activity by inhibition of histone deacetylation--rescue of transcriptionally compromised mutants.	"Androgens are critical in the development and maintenance of the male reproductive system and important in the progression of prostate cancer. The effects of androgens are mediated by the androgen receptor (AR), which is a ligand-modulated transcription factor that belongs to the nuclear receptor superfamily. We and others have previously shown that CREB-binding protein (CBP) can function as a coactivator for AR. Similar to some other nuclear receptor coactivators and/or the proteins that they interact with, CBP has histone acetyl transferase (HAT) activity that is thought to contribute to transcriptional activation by nuclear receptors. We have therefore assessed whether an increase in the histone acetylation status in the cell can influence AR transcriptional activity, by using the histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors (HDACIs) trichostatin A (TSA), sodium butyrate (Na-But) and depsipeptide (FR901228). We found that inhibition of HDAC activity significantly increased the ability of endogenous AR in LNCaP cells, or ectopically expressed AR in HeLa cells, to activate transcription from AR-dependent reporter constructs. In addition, HDACIs increased the androgen-dependent activation of the prostate-specific antigen (PSA) gene in LNCaP cells, an increase that was not due to an increase in nuclear AR protein levels. Moreover, the viral oncoprotein E1A that inhibits CBP HAT activity fully repressed the ability of HDACIs to stimulate AR-mediated transcription, indicating that CBP is involved in this process. Deletional mutagenesis of AR indicated that whereas the AF-2 domain in the C-terminus is dispensable, the AF-1 domain in the N-terminus is required for augmentation of AR action by HDACIs, an observation which is in concordance with the reduced ability of CBP to activate AR N-terminal deletion mutants. Furthermore, HDACI treatment rescued the deficiency in the transactivation potential of AF-2 mutants. Taken together, our findings suggest that a change in the level of histone acetylation of target genes is an important determinant of AR action, possibly mediated by CBP."
15350307	"Genotyping of AR and PSA polymorphisms in a patient with Klinefelter syndrome, non-Hodgkin lymphoma, and adenocarcinoma of the prostate."	"It has been hypothesized that the AR (androgen receptor) gene binds the two PSA (prostate-specific antigen) alleles with differing affinities and may differentially influence prostate cancer risk. In this article, we report a case of adenocarcinoma of the prostate in a 56-year-old man with Klinefelter syndrome (47,XXY) and non-Hodgkin lymphoma, as well as the AR and PSA genotype. AR and PSA gene polymorphisms were analyzed by polymerase chain reaction-based methods using DNA from peripheral white blood cells and the prostate cancer. We determined the methylation status of the AR gene on the X chromosome. The patient presents with the AG genotype for the ARE-1 (androgen response element) region of the PSA gene. We detect the presence of two short AR alleles with 19 and 11 CAG repeats each. Unmethylated alleles were demonstrated for both. The shorter allele was inactive in more than 60% of total DNA in both control blood and prostate cancer cells. The presence of short AR alleles and the G allele of the PSA gene may contribute to the development of prostate cancer in a 47,XXY patient."
15375556	A telomerase-immortalized primary human prostate cancer clonal cell line with neoplastic phenotypes.	"Understanding of molecular genetic mechanisms underlying prostate carcinogenesis would be greatly advanced by in vitro models of prostate tumors representing primary tumors. We have successfully established a neoplastic immortalized human prostate epithelial (HPE) clonal culture derived from a primary tumor of a prostate cancer patient (RC-58T) with hTERT, the catalytic subunit of telomerase. The early passage RC-58T cells derived from a radical prostatectomy specimen of a 52-year-old white male patient was transduced through infection with a retrovirus vector expressing the hTERT for the establishment of the RC-58T/hTERT cell line. One clonal line, soft-agar derived from the RC-58T/hTERT cell line, was isolated and further characterized phenotypically and genetically. These clonal (RC-58T/hTERT SA#4) cells are currently growing well at passage 70 and exhibit transformed morphology. The RC-58T/hTERT SA#4 line expressed a high level of telomerase activity and showed anchorage-independent growth in soft agar. The clonal line like the untransduced RC-58T cells (passage 3) expressed prostate specific antigen (PSA), androgen receptor (AR), prostate stem cell antigen (PSCA), and an androgen-regulated prostate specific gene NKX3.1, P16, and cytokeratin (CK) 8. Growth is slightly stimulated by dihydrotestosterone (DHT), and lyates are immunoreactive with AR antibody by Western blot analysis. More importantly, this clonal line produced adenocarcinomas when transplanted into SCID mice. A number of chromosome alterations were observed including the loss of chromosome Y, 1q, 2p, 3p, 4q, 8p, 11p, 14p, 17p and 18q. Our results demonstrate that this primary tumor-derived HPE cell line retained its neoplastic phenotypes and its prostate specific markers and should allow elucidating molecular and genetic alterations involved in prostate cancer. This is the first documented case of an AR and PSA expressing telomerase established human prostate cancer cell line with neoplastic phenotypes from a primary tumor of a prostate cancer patient."
15389780	Loss of heterozygosity in chromosomal region 16q24.3 associated with progression of prostate cancer.	"BACKGROUND: The molecular mechanisms underlying the development and progression of prostate cancer have remained poorly understood. To find out potential genetic markers likely to underlie tumor progression, the pattern of allelic loss on chromosome arm 16q in matched primary, locally recurrent, and metastatic prostate cancer specimens was analyzed in the present study. METHODS: The frequency of loss of heterozygosity (LOH) in 74 tumor specimens (62 primary cancer foci and 12 metastatic tumors) collected from 33 prostate cancer patients was determined by fragment analysis using 17 polymorphic microsatellite markers. RESULTS: The overall frequency of patients showing allelic loss at one or more loci on 16q was 68% (21/31) in primary tumors and 90% (28/31) in recurrent tumors. Of the individual markers, D16S520, locating in region 16q24.3, exhibited a statistically significant development of LOH during disease recurrence (P < 0.01). Regarding distant metastases, instead, there seemed to be no allelic loss events exclusively typical of metastatic tumors at 16q. CONCLUSIONS: The data suggest the location of gene(s) related to prostate cancer progression at 16q24.3."
15389811	Androgen deprivation therapy for prostate cancer: current status and future prospects.	"Androgens play a major role in promoting the development and progression of prostate cancer. As a result, androgen ablation or blockade of androgen action through the androgen receptor (AR) has been the cornerstone of treatment of advanced prostate cancer. Different strategies involving this hormonal therapy produce a significant clinical response in most of the patients, but most responders eventually lose dependency, resulting in mortality. Thus, whether hormonal therapy contributes to the improvement of overall survival rates, especially in patients with advanced prostate cancer, remains controversial. However, patients with advanced disease clearly have a benefit from androgen deprivation-based treatment for palliating their symptoms and for improving the quality of their lives. In order to improve overall survival, novel treatment strategies that prolong the androgen-dependent state and that are useful for androgen-independent disease based on specific molecular mechanisms need to be identified."
15474145	Multiple abnormalities detected by dye reversal genomic microarrays in prostate cancer: a much greater sensitivity than conventional cytogenetics.	"Prostate cancer remains the most common male malignancy in Western countries, yet limited information exists regarding genetic changes and clinical correlations. The advent of comparative genomic hybridization microarray (GM) technology has recently allowed for precise screening of DNAs for genetic copy number changes; this offers an advantage over previous techniques, including conventional cytogenetics. A problem with cytogenetic prostate cancer analysis has been the study of the appropriate cell types because this is a highly heterogeneous tumor. We have performed GM using the Spectral Genomics Inc. dye reversal platform on 20 primary prostate tumors. These tumor samples were from frozen tissue collected over the last 10 years and multiple clinical parameters, including follow-up were collected on these patients; cytogenetic analysis was previously attempted on all patients. Eighty percent (16/20) of specimens showed copy number changes, 65% of which were losses and 35% were gains of genetic material. The most common changes observed were loss of an interstitial region of 2q (8 cases, 40%), followed by loss of interstitial 6q (6 cases, 30%), loss at 8p and 13q (5 cases each, 25%), gain at 3p and loss at 5q, 16q, and Xq (4 cases each, 20%), and gain at 8p (3 cases, 15%). There was evidence of correlation of loss at 5q with a positive node status. Cytogenetic studies on these same patients only detected clonal changes in 40% (8/20) specimens and did not detect the majority of abnormalities seen by the GM technique. We propose this technology for the evaluation of prostate and other heterogeneous cancers as a rapid and efficient way to detect genetic copy number changes."
15520196	BRCA1 induces antioxidant gene expression and resistance to oxidative stress.	"Mutations of the breast cancer susceptibility gene 1 (BRCA1), a tumor suppressor, confer an increased risk for breast, ovarian, and prostate cancers. To investigate the function of the BRCA1 gene, we performed DNA microarray and confirmatory reverse transcription-PCR analyses to identify BRCA1-regulated gene expression changes. We found that BRCA1 up-regulates the expression of multiple genes involved in the cytoprotective antioxidant response, including glutathione S-transferases, oxidoreductases, and other antioxidant genes. Consistent with these findings, BRCA1 overexpression conferred resistance while BRCA1 deficiency conferred sensitivity to several different oxidizing agents (hydrogen peroxide and paraquat). In addition, in the setting of oxidative stress (due to hydrogen peroxide), BRCA1 shifted the cellular redox balance to a higher ratio of reduced to oxidized glutathione. Finally, BRCA1 stimulated antioxidant response element-driven transcriptional activity and enhanced the activity of the antioxidant response transcription factor nuclear factor erythroid-derived 2 like 2 [also called NRF2 (NFE2L2)]. The ability of BRCA1 to stimulate antioxidant response element-dependent transcription and to protect cells against oxidative stress was attenuated by inhibition of nuclear factor erythroid-derived 2 like 2. These findings suggest a novel function for BRCA1, i.e., to protect cells against oxidative stress. This function would be consistent with the postulated role of BRCA1 as a caretaker gene in preserving genomic integrity."
15556875	[Molecular mechanisms involved in hormone resistance of prostate cancer]	"Prostate cancer has an androgen-dependent growth mediated by the androgen receptor (AR). Androgen pathway blockage is the standard therapy for the treatment of prostate cancers at an advanced stage. In spite of an initial sensitivity, prostate cancers become more or less quickly towards androgen-independent. Hormone refractory can be due to amplification of AR gene, AR mutations and the increase in co-activator protein expression or in the 5alpha-reductase activity. These induce an agonist activity with the anti-androgens or others steroid hormones like estrogens on AR and allow AR activation with weak concentrations of androgens. Growth factors and cytokines can induce AR phosphorylation independently of the ligand fixation. In condition of androgenic deprivation, AR remains actively involved in the growth of the cancerous cells prostate. Nevertheless, there are others partial AR-independent pathways as neuroendocrine differentiation. The comprehension of these various mechanisms is the key of the development of more effective therapies on hormono-refractory prostate cancers."
15663988	Alterations of androgen receptor in prostate cancer.	"The significance of androgens in the development of prostate cancer has been known for more than half century. During the last decade, a lot of effort has been put to study the significance of the specific nuclear receptor of the hormone, androgen receptor (AR). It has been suggested that polymorphisms, especially the length of CAG repeat in exon 1 of the gene, are associated with the risk of prostate cancer. However, not all studies have confirmed the association. Most surprisingly, it has now become clear that prostate carcinomas emerging during the androgen withdrawal therapy (i.e. hormone-refractory tumors) are capable of reactivating the AR-mediated signalling despite of the low levels of androgens. In addition, it has been shown that AR gene itself is genetically targeted. One-third of the hormone-refractory prostate carcinomas contains amplification of the gene. In addition, 10-30% of prostate carcinomas treated by antiandrogens acquire point mutation in the AR gene. The genetic alterations in AR indicate that receptor should be considered as putative treatment target. Evidently, the currently available antiandrogens are not capable to abolish the AR-mediated signalling efficiently enough."
15705654	Estimating cancer survival and clinical outcome based on genetic tumor progression scores.	"MOTIVATION: In cancer research, prediction of time to death or relapse is important for a meaningful tumor classification and selecting appropriate therapies. Survival prognosis is typically based on clinical and histological parameters. There is increasing interest in identifying genetic markers that better capture the status of a tumor in order to improve on existing predictions. The accumulation of genetic alterations during tumor progression can be used for the assessment of the genetic status of the tumor. For modeling dependences between the genetic events, evolutionary tree models have been applied. RESULTS: Mixture models of oncogenetic trees provide a probabilistic framework for the estimation of typical pathogenetic routes. From these models we derive a genetic progression score (GPS) that estimates the genetic status of a tumor. GPS is calculated for glioblastoma patients from loss of heterozygosity measurements and for prostate cancer patients from comparative genomic hybridization measurements. Cox proportional hazard models are then fitted to observed survival times of glioblastoma patients and to times until PSA relapse following radical prostatectomy of prostate cancer patients. It turns out that the genetically defined GPS is predictive even after adjustment for classical clinical markers and thus can be considered a medically relevant prognostic factor. AVAILABILITY: Mtreemix, a software package for estimating tree mixture models, is freely available for non-commercial users at http://mtreemix.bioinf.mpi-sb.mpg.de. The raw cancer datasets and R code for the analysis with Cox models are available upon request from the corresponding author."
15707575	The p75NTR mediates a bifurcated signal transduction cascade through the NF kappa B and JNK pathways to inhibit cell survival.	"p75NTR is most abundantly expressed in the nervous system, but is also widely expressed in many other organs and tissues where it primarily functions as a negative regulator of cell survival. In the prostate, p75NTR functions as an inhibitory protein capable of slowing proliferation and inducing apoptosis. It has been shown that p75NTR is expressed in the normal prostate, progressively lost from malignant tumor cells in vivo, and largely absent from prostate cancer cell lines derived from metastases. Although the role of p75NTR in prostate cancer has been well established, the signal transduction pathway that mediates its inhibitory activity has only been partially elucidated. This study demonstrates that exogenous expression of p75NTR down-regulates, in a dose-dependent manner, a bifurcated signaling cascade that results in reduced expression of potent transcription effectors. This two-arm signal transduction cascade was directly linked to the upstream receptor by using dominant-negative deletion constructs of p75NTR that rescued tumor cells from p75NTR-induced loss of survival and promotion of apoptosis. Furthermore, the dominant negatives rescued alterations in the levels of signal transduction intermediates. Conversely, the use of kinase-inactive intermediates that are downstream of the receptor further reduced expression of involved transcription effectors and reduced survival of the cells. These results provide a definitive link between the proximate p75NTR and signal transduction intermediates leading to the transcription effectors NF kappa B and JNK, with associated growth suppression and induction of apoptosis."
15734964	Macrophage scavenger receptor 1 999C>T (R293X) mutation and risk of prostate cancer.	"BACKGROUND: Variants in the gene encoding the macrophage scavenger receptor 1 (MSR1(4)) protein have been identified in men with prostate cancer, and several small studies have suggested that the 999C>T (R293X) protein-truncating mutation may be associated with an increased risk for this disease. METHODS: Using large case-control, cohort, and prostate cancer family studies conducted in several Western countries, we tested for the 999C>T mutation in 2,943 men with invasive prostate carcinoma, including 401 males from multiple-case families, 1,982 cases unselected for age, and 575 men diagnosed before the age of 56 years, and in 2,870 male controls. Risk ratios were estimated by unconditional logistic regression adjusting for country and by a modified segregation analysis. A meta-analysis was conducted pooling our data with published data. RESULTS: The prevalence of MSR1*999C>T mutation carriers was 0.027 (SE, 0.003) in cases and 0.022 (SE, 0.002) in controls, and did not differ by country, ethnicity, or source. The adjusted risk ratio for prostate cancer associated with being a 999C>T carrier was 1.31 [95% confidence interval (CI), 0.93-1.84; P = 0.16]. The modified segregation analysis estimated the risk ratio to be 1.20 (95% CI, 0.87-1.66; P = 0.16). The risk ratio estimated from the meta-analysis was 1.34 (95% CI, 0.94-1.89; P = 0.10). CONCLUSION: Our large-scale analysis of case and controls from several countries found no evidence that the 999C>T mutation is associated with increased risk of prostate cancer. The meta-analysis suggests it is unlikely that this mutation confers more than a 2-fold increased risk."
15735753	Epigenetic inactivation of the human sprouty2 (hSPRY2) homologue in prostate cancer.	"Abnormal signalling events mediated by receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs) contribute to human carcinogenesis. Sprouty2 (Spry2) is a key antagonistic regulator of RTK signalling and suppression of its expression or function may facilitate proliferation and angiogenesis. Using prostate cancer (CaP) as a model, we investigated the significance of Spry2 in human malignancy. We observed downregulated Spry2 expression in invasive CaP cell lines and high-grade clinical CaP (compared to benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) and well-differentiated tumours, P=0.041). A large CpG island is associated with hSPRY2, and extensive hypermethylation of this CpG island was observed in 76-82% of high-grade CaP, while control BPH tissues were predominantly unmethylated (P=0.0005). Furthermore, suppressed Spry2 expression correlated with methylation of the CpG region in clinical samples (P=0.004) and treatment with 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine reactivated Spry2 expression in LNCaP and PC-3M cells. hSPRY2 maps to the long arm of chromosome 13 (13q31.1), where loss of heterozygosity (LOH) has been reported. We found no evidence of mutation; however, we demonstrated 27-40% LOH using flanking markers to hSPRY2. Hence, while biallelic epigenetic inactivation of hSPRY2 represents the main genetic event in prostate carcinogenesis, the observed 27-40% LOH presents evidence of hemizygous deletion with the remaining allele hypermethylated. We therefore propose hSPRY2 as a potential tumour suppressor locus in CaP."
15753999	Effects of WNT/beta-catenin pathway activation on signaling through T-cell factor and androgen receptor in prostate cancer cell lines.	"Dysregulation of the WNT/beta-catenin pathway is thought to contribute to prostate cancer progression. Mutations of beta-catenin occurring in 5-7% of advanced prostate cancers may act by stimulating TCF-dependent and/or androgen receptor (AR)-dependent transcription. Using a reporter gene approach we found overexpressed mutated beta-catenin to enhance AR-regulated probasin-promoter activity in the AR-positive prostate cancer cell line 22Rv1, particularly at low androgen levels. In 22Rv1 cells mutated beta-catenin was able to stimulate TCF-dependent transcription but was unable to do so in LNCaP cells where it activates the AR. Since beta-catenin mutations are rare in vivo, we studied further possible routes of WNT-pathway modulation. Higher concentrations of LiCl, a GSK3beta-inhibitor, were required to activate TCF-dependent rather than AR-dependent reporter constructs. In 22Rv1 overexpression of E-cadherin repressed androgen-dependent transcription, but did not inhibit transcription of TCF-dependent reporter genes as in bladder cancer cell lines. Interestingly, Wnt-3a stimulated proliferation selectively in the AR-positive prostate cancer cell lines 22Rv1 and LNCaP, even though TCF-dependent reporter gene transcription was not induced in LNCaP cells. In summary, the data from our study support the idea that activation of WNT/beta-catenin signaling in AR-positive prostate cancer cells may predominantly act through AR-dependent mechanisms rather than classical TCF-dependent mechanisms."
15768829	Y chromosome polymorphisms in medicine.	"Ninety-five percent of the length of the human Y chromosome is inherited as a single block in linkage from father to male offspring as a haploid entity. Thus, the Y chromosome represents an invaluable record of all mutations that have occurred along male lineages throughout evolution. For this reason, Y chromosomal DNA variation has been mainly used for investigations on human evolution and for forensic purposes or paternity analysis. Recently, Y chromosomal polymorphisms have been applied in molecular medicine from the perspective of male-specific (spermatogenic failure, testis and prostate cancer) and prevalently male-associated (hypertension, autism) diseases. The absence of recombination on the MSY (male-specific Y) region means that polymorphisms, located in this region, are in tight association with potential functional variations associated with Y-linked phenotypes. Thus, an indirect way to explore if Y chromosome genes are involved in the etiology of a specific disease is the definition of Y chromosome haplogroups in patients versus disease-free and/or the general population. Data on patients with reduced sperm count and prostate cancer indicate that the 'at risk Y haplogroup' may be different in different populations. The situation is rather contradictory for other male-specific or male-associated diseases and further multicenter--possibly multiethnic--studies are needed."
15781617	Activated Ras enhances insulin-like growth factor I induction of vascular endothelial growth factor in prostate epithelial cells.	"Mutations in the three closely related RAS genes, HRAS, KRAS, and NRAS are among the most common mutations found in human cancer; reaching 50% in some types of cancer, such as colorectal carcinoma, and 10% in prostate cancers. The activated Ras proteins produced by these mutations can, among other cellular changes, increase vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) production. Moreover, tumors bearing RAS gene mutations are more vascular than tumors without RAS mutations. We find that, in prostate epithelial cells, the introduction of an activated HRAS causes cells to produce VEGF in response to insulin-like growth factor I (IGF-I). In comparison, cells lacking an activated Ras are unable to produce VEGF in response to IGF-I. This effect of Ras may occur through stabilization of a second messenger protein, insulin receptor substrate 1, that mediates PI 3-kinase-dependent signaling. Because IGF-I is a paracrine/endocrine hormone that has been associated with increased risk for several types of cancer, these results suggest a novel interrelationship between oncogenic conversion of a cellular gene such as HRAS, and IGF-I produced locally for normal tissue homeostasis."
15828836	"Novel C-17-heteroaryl steroidal CYP17 inhibitors/antiandrogens: synthesis, in vitro biological activity, pharmacokinetics, and antitumor activity in the LAPC4 human prostate cancer xenograft model."	"New chemical entities, steroidal C-17 benzoazoles (5, 6, 9 and 10) and pyrazines (14 and 15) were rationally designed and synthesized. The key reaction for synthesis of the benzoazoles involved the nucleophilic vinylic ""addition-elimination"" substitution reaction of 3beta-acetoxy-17-chloro-16-formylandrosta-5,16-diene (2) and benzoazole nucleophiles, while that for synthesis of pyrazines involved palladium-catalyzed cross-coupling reaction of 17-iodoandrosta-5,16-dien-3beta-ol (13) with tributylstannyl diazines. Some of the compounds were shown to be potent inhibitors of human CYP17 enzyme as well as potent antagonist of both wild type and mutant androgen receptors (AR). The most potent CYP17 inhibitors were 3beta-hydroxy-17-(1H-benzimidazole-1-yl)androsta-5,16-diene (5, code named VN/124-1), 3beta-hydroxy-17-(5(1)-pyrimidyl)androsta-5,16-diene (15) and 17-(1H-benzimidazole-1-yl)androsta-4,16-dien-3-one (6), with IC(50) values of 300, 500 and 915 nM, respectively. Compounds 5, 6, 14 and 15 were effective at preventing binding of (3)H-R1881 (methyltrienolone, a stable synthetic androgen) to both the mutant LNCaP AR and the wild-type AR, but with a 2.2- to 5-fold higher binding efficiency to the latter. Compounds 5 and 6 were also shown to be potent pure AR antagonists. The cell growth studies showed that 5 and 6 inhibit the growth of DHT-stimulated LNCaP and LAPC4 prostate cancer cells with IC(50) values in the low micromolar range (i.e., <10 microM). Their inhibitory potencies were comparable to that of casodex but remarkably superior to that of flutamide. The pharmacokinetics of compounds 5 and 6 in mice were investigated. Following s.c. administration of 50 mg/kg of 5 and 6, peak plasma levels of 16.82 and 5.15 ng/mL, respectively, occurred after 30 to 60 min, both compounds were cleared rapidly from plasma (terminal half-lives of 44.17 and 39.93 min, respectively), and neither was detectable at 8 h. Remarkably, compound 5 was rapidly converted into a metabolite tentatively identified as 17-(1H-benzimidazol-1-yl)androsta-3-one. When tested in vivo, 5 proved to be very effective at inhibiting the growth of androgen-dependent LAPC4 human prostate tumor xenograft, while 6 was ineffective. Compound 5 (50 mg/kg/twice daily) resulted in a 93.8% reduction (P = 0.00065) in the mean final tumor volume compared with controls, and it was also significantly more effective than castration. To our knowledge, this is the first example of an antihormonal agent (an inhibitor of androgen synthesis (CYP17 inhibitor)/antiandrogen) that is significantly more effective than castration in suppression of androgen-dependent prostate tumor growth. In view of these impressive anticancer properties, compound 5 is a strong candidate for development for the treatment of human prostate cancer."
15860352	Molecular characterization of a consistent 4.5-megabase deletion at 4q28 in prostate cancer cells.	"Spectral karyotyping of prostate cell lines LNCaP, DU145, PC3, and 22RV demonstrated structural chromosome rearrangements involving the distal long arm of chromosome 4. In all but 22RV, these are nonreciprocal translocations between chromosomes 4 and 10. In 22RV, an apparently reciprocal t(2q;4q) is seen. Fluorescence in situ hybridization analysis of the chromosome 4 translocation breakpoints demonstrated that deletions were associated with all of the translocations, resulting in a net loss of chromosome material. Overlapping deletions in 4q28 approximately 34 were seen in LNCap, DU145, and 22RV, which defined an approximately 4.5-megabase pair common region of deletion. The deletion in PC3 was more proximal on 4q, involving the 4q21 approximately q26 region. A meta analysis of high-resolution definition of losses of chromosome material from published studies demonstrates that loss of 4q material may occur in at least 50% of primary tumors. This analysis defines a series of genes in the critical 4q region, which is potentially associated with prostate tumor development."
15897571	Functionality of androgen receptor-based gene expression imaging in hormone refractory prostate cancer.	"PURPOSE: A highly augmented, prostate-specific two-step transcriptional amplification (TSTA) method was developed with the ultimate goal of delivering an effective and safe gene-based treatment to prostate cancer patients. Because very limited treatment options are available for recurrent hormone refractory prostate cancer (HRPC), it is imperative to assess whether the prostate-specific antigen (PSA) promoter-based TSTA gene therapy will be functional in HRPC. EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: We tested the TSTA-driven adenovirus vector on three androgen-dependent and six HRPC models. Real-time gene expression was monitored by both optical imaging and the combined modality of positron emission tomography (PET) and computed tomography. RESULTS: The TSTA-driven firefly luciferase expressing adenoviral vector was active in all androgen receptor (AR)-expressing HRPC models, but inactive in AR- and PSA-negative lines. Interestingly, the TSTA-mediated gene expression was induced by hydrocortisone in MDA PCa 2b, a cell line with mutated AR that possesses altered ligand specificity. In animal models, the TSTA-mediated optical signal was more robust in the HRPC than androgen-dependent tumors. In a parallel trend, a TSTA vector that expresses the herpes simplex virus thymidine kinase PET reporter gene also displayed more robust PET signal in the HRPC tumor. CONCLUSIONS: The activity of TSTA system is AR dependent and it recapitulates the functional status of endogenous AR. These data support the conclusion that AR function is activated in HRPC despite castrated levels of androgen. Together with the fact that majority of recurrent prostate cancers express AR and PSA, we foresee that the TSTA approach can be a promising gene therapy strategy for the advanced stages of prostate cancer."
15947099	Mechanisms of endocrine therapy-responsive and -unresponsive prostate tumours.	"Several options for the endocrine treatment of non-organ-confined prostate cancer are available. They include surgical or medical removal of androgenic hormones or administration of non-steroidal anti-androgens. However, tumour progression after a period of remission of the disease inevitably occurs in virtually all patients. The androgen receptor (AR) is, in various tumour models, implicated in the development of therapy resistance but molecular mechanisms that by-pass the receptor have also been described. Adaptation mechanisms relevant to tumour recurrence include up-regulation of AR mRNA and protein, overexpression of AR coactivators, increased activation of mutated receptors by steroids and anti-androgens, and ligand-independent activation. For research studies, sublines that respond to but do not depend on androgen for their proliferation were generated. Coactivators SRC-1, TIF-2, RAC3, p300, CBP, Tip60, and gelsolin are highly expressed in endocrine therapy-resistant prostate cancer. AR point mutations are increasingly detected in relapsed cancers and contribute to the failure of endocrine therapy in a subgroup of patients. Ligand-independent activation of the AR by HER-2/neu and interleukin-6 is associated with activation of the signalling pathway of mitogen-activated protein kinase. Increased activity of intracellular kinases may affect cellular events in both an AR-dependent and -independent manner. Mitogen-activated protein kinases are strongly phosphorylated in endocrine therapy-resistant prostate tumours. Similarly, activation of the AR by phosphorylated protein kinase B, Akt, has also been reported in prostate cancer. Activation of the Akt pathway contributes to increased survival of prostate tumour cells."
15952985	Chromosomal changes in prostate cancer: a fluorescence in situ hybridization study.	"The incidence of prostate cancer (PC) is increasing steadily with the aging population in Singapore. As the pattern of chromosomal aberrations in Asian men with PC is poorly understood, we investigated the numerical aberrations for chromosomes 7, 8, 11, and 17 by fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH). FISH was performed on standard sections and tissue microarrays of 54 PC and 33 benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) specimens. Among the 54 PC specimens, FISH detected 44 cases as aneusomy and two as disomy and was unsuccessful for eight cases. Cytogenetic alterations of two or more chromosomes per tumor were detected in 33/46 (72%) PCs. The most frequent alteration was aneusomy of chromosome 8 detected in 34/46 (74%) cases followed by numerical aberrations in chromosome 7 (61%). Gain of 8q24, loss of chromosome 7, and gain of 11q13 were associated with higher Gleason score and were statistically significant. Gain of chromosome 7 was more common in locally advanced disease, while gain of chromosome 11q13 and chromosome 7 was more common in metastatic disease."
15958588	Potent modulation of intestinal tumorigenesis in Apcmin/+ mice by the polyamine catabolic enzyme spermidine/spermine N1-acetyltransferase.	"Intracellular polyamine pools are homeostatically maintained by processes involving biosynthesis, catabolism, and transport. Although most polyamine-based anticancer strategies target biosynthesis, we recently showed that activation of polyamine catabolism at the level of spermidine/spermine N(1)-acetyltransferase-1 (SSAT) suppresses tumor outgrowth in a mouse prostate cancer model. Herein, we examined the effects of differential SSAT expression on intestinal tumorigenesis in the Apc(Min/+) (MIN) mouse. When MIN mice were crossed with SSAT-overproducing transgenic mice, they developed 3- and 6-fold more adenomas in the small intestine and colon, respectively, than normal MIN mice. Despite accumulation of the SSAT product, N(1)-acetylspermidine, spermidine and spermine pools were only slightly decreased due to a huge compensatory increase in polyamine biosynthetic enzyme activities that gave rise to enhanced metabolic flux. When MIN mice were crossed with SSAT knock-out mice, they developed 75% fewer adenomas in the small intestine, suggesting that under basal conditions, SSAT contributes significantly to the MIN phenotype. Despite the loss in catabolic capability, tumor spermidine and spermine pools failed to increase significantly due to a compensatory decrease in biosynthetic enzyme activity giving rise to a reduced metabolic flux. Loss of heterozygosity at the Apc locus was observed in tumors from both SSAT-transgenic and -deficient MIN mice, indicating that loss of heterozygosity remained the predominant oncogenic mechanism. Based on these data, we propose a model in which SSAT expression alters flux through the polyamine pathway giving rise to metabolic events that promote tumorigenesis. The finding that deletion of SSAT reduces tumorigenesis suggests that small-molecule inhibition of the enzyme may represent a nontoxic prevention and/or treatment strategy for gastrointestinal cancers."
15958637	Blockade of transforming growth factor-beta signaling suppresses progression of androgen-independent human prostate cancer in nude mice.	"We investigated the role of transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta) signaling in the growth and metastasis of PC-3MM2 human prostate cancer cells. Highly metastatic PC-3MM2 human prostate cancer cells were engineered to constitutively overexpress a dominant-negative type II TGF-beta receptor (DNR). Transfection of DNR had minimal direct effects on cell growth and attenuated TGF-beta-induced cell growth inhibition and TGF-beta1 production. There were no discernable differences in tumorigenicity (tumor incidence) among PC-3MM2 variants when the cells were implanted into the prostates of nude mice. Growth rate and metastatic incidence of DNR-engineered PC-3MM2 cells, however, were significantly reduced. Most cells in the control tumors were positively stained by an antibody to proliferation cell nuclear antigen and very few cells were stained by terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase-mediated nick-end labeling (TUNEL). In sharp contrast, tumors formed by PC-3MM2-DNR cells contained fewer proliferation cell nuclear antigen-positive cells and many more TUNEL-positive cells. Staining with antibody against CD31 showed that control tumors contained more blood vessels than PC-3MM2-DNR tumors. Expression of interleukin-8 (IL-8) in tumors formed by PC-3MM2 cells was significantly reduced as revealed by both Northern blotting and ELISA. Finally, transfection of antisense IL-8 cDNA significantly reduced IL-8 production by PC-3MM2 cells and antisense IL-8-transfected PC-3MM2 cells grew slower in comparison with parental and control vector-transfected cells. Taken together, our data suggest that TGF-beta signaling, by regulating IL-8 expression in tumor cells and hence tumor angiogenesis, is critical for progressive growth of PC-3MM2 cells in the prostate of nude mice."
15976331	Molecular pathology of prostate cancer.	"The molecular pathology of prostate cancer is complex; not only are multiple genes involved in its pathogenesis, but additional environmental factors such as diet and inflammation are also involved. The exhaustive research into prostate cancer to date has demonstrated a complex interaction of multiple genes and environmental factors, some of which may be more important in individual prostate cancer cases. This is an exciting era, with the emergence of new investigative tools such as DNA microarray technology and the application of the field of proteomics to the study of human cancers. Knowledge of genetic changes underlying the initiation, development, and progression of prostate cancer is accumulating rapidly. With increasing knowledge, it may be possible to distinguish indolent from aggressive prostate tumours by molecular fingerprinting. This review discusses the most consistently reported molecular pathological findings in hereditary and sporadic prostate cancer, together with new concepts and technologies."
15981205	RNASEL germline variants are associated with pancreatic cancer.	"The RNASEL (encoding ribonuclease L) gene Glu265X mutation has been implicated in familial prostate cancer, and an association between the RNASEL Arg462Gln variant and sporadic and familial prostate cancer, has also been suggested. Because prostate cancer occurs in some familial pancreatic cancer families, we evaluated the role of the RNASEL gene variants Glu265X and Arg462Gln in the etiology of pancreatic cancer. Exon 2 of the RNASEL gene was directly sequenced in the germline of 36 familial and 75 sporadic pancreatic cancer patients and in 108 controls. The Glu265X mutation was identified in one (2.8%) familial and one (1.3%) sporadic pancreatic cancer case, but not in any of the controls. Arg462Gln variants were identified in 61 (56%) controls and in 55 (73%) sporadic pancreatic cancer cases with 8 (7%) and 12 (16%) homozygotes, respectively (p = 0.009). For homozygous carriers the increased risk for pancreatic cancer was 3.5 (odds ratio [OR] = 3.53, 95% confidence interval [CI] = 1.11-11.46, p = 0.03). The population attributable fraction (PAF) was 38.7% (95% CI = 0.08-0.80). In familial pancreatic cancer no association between Arg462Gln genotypes and pancreatic cancer risk was evident. In sporadic pancreatic cancer there were no significant differences between Arg462Gln genotypes regarding clinical characteristics. In familial pancreatic cancer, however, patients with Arg462Gln variants had more aggressive tumors with more high grade cancers (OR = 15.40, p = 0.009) and more distant metastases (OR = 7.00, p = 0.04) than patients with the wild-type genotype. Our results suggest that RNASEL variants Glu265X and Arg462Gln may contribute to the tumorigenesis of sporadic and familial pancreatic cancer, which has to be proven in large scale studies."
15983032	BRCA1 interaction with human papillomavirus oncoproteins.	"Previously, we reported that BRCA1 strongly represses the transcriptional activity of estrogen receptor-alpha (ER-alpha) in human breast and prostate cancer cells but only weakly inhibits ER-alpha in cervical cancer cells. We now report that introduction of the human papillomavirus E7 or E6 oncogenes into human papillomavirus-negative cells rescues the BRCA1 repression of ER-alpha activity and that the E7 and E6 oncoproteins interact directly with BRCA1 in vitro and associate with BRCA1 in vivo in cultured cells. This interaction involves at least two contact points on BRCA1, one within an N-terminal site shown previously to interact with ER-alpha and the other in a C-terminal region of BRCA1 containing the first BRCA1 C-terminal domain. Point mutations within the zinc finger domains of E7 and E6 inactivated the binding to the N terminus of BRCA1 and reduced their ability to rescue BRCA1 inhibition of ER-alpha. E6 and E7 also antagonized the ability of BRCA1 to inhibit c-Myc E-box-mediated transactivation and human telomerase reverse transcriptase promoter activity, in a manner dependent upon the zinc finger domains. Finally, the ability of E6 and E7 to antagonize BRCA1 did not involve proteolytic degradation of BRCA1. These findings suggest functional interactions of BRCA1 with E7 and E6. The potential significance of these findings is discussed."
15994418	Establishment of a cell line derived from a canine prostate carcinoma with a highly rearranged karyotype.	"Akin to the situation in humans, dogs are frequently affected by tumors of the prostate. The malignancies share many similarities between both species, for example, median age at the onset of the disease and metastatic behavior. In human prostatic tumor samples, investigations of prepared metaphase spreads showed a variety of chromosomal aberrations, with trisomies of chromosomes 7, 8, and 17 as the leading cytogenetic abnormalities. In this article we present one case of a canine adenocarcinoma of the prostate, including clinical examination and establishment of a cell line from a tumor sample obtained from the affected 10-year-old male Briard. Searching for similarities between both species in respect to chromosomal changes within the tumor samples, we investigated prepared metaphases of the canine cell line cytogenetically. These investigations presented a highly rearranged karyotype showing a large biarmed marker consisting of material from chromosomes 1 and 2 in addition to centromeric fusions between dog chromosomes 1 and 5 that both could be identified in every metaphase investigated, while centric fusions of chromosomes 4 and 5 occurred in up to 50% of the metaphases. The cell line grew very well and showed evidence of being spontaneously immortalized when it crossed the 20th passage."
16025444	Determining joint carrier probabilities of cancer-causing genes using Markov chain Monte Carlo methods.	"In genetic counseling for cancer risk, the probability of carrying a mutation of a cancer-causing gene plays an important role. Family history of various cancers is important in calculating this probability. BRCAPRO is a widely used software for calculating the probability of carrying mutations in BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes given the family history of breast and ovarian cancer in first- and second-degree relatives. BRCAPRO uses an analytical (exact) calculational procedure. Using Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods, we extend BRCAPRO to handle, in principle, any type of cancer, family history, any number of genes and alleles that each gene may have. When the information used in this MCMC approach is the same as for BRCAPRO (two genes: BRCA1 and BRCA2; two cancers: breast and ovarian; first- and second-degree relatives only), the two approaches give essentially the same answer. Extending the model to include (1) prostate cancer, (2) two mutated alleles of BRCA2, namely, mutations in Ovarian Cancer Cluster Region (OCCR) and non-OCCR region, and (3) relatives of degree greater than second-degree, leads to different carrier probabilities. The MCMC approach is a useful tool in building a comprehensive model to give accurate estimates of carrier probabilities. Such an approach will be even more important as additional information about the genetics of various cancers becomes available."
16027218	Huntingtin interacting protein 1 modulates the transcriptional activity of nuclear hormone receptors.	"Internalization of activated receptors regulates signaling, and endocytic adaptor proteins are well-characterized in clathrin-mediated uptake. One of these adaptor proteins, huntingtin interacting protein 1 (HIP1), induces cellular transformation and is overexpressed in some prostate cancers. We have discovered that HIP1 associates with the androgen receptor through a central coiled coil domain and is recruited to DNA response elements upon androgen stimulation. HIP1 is a novel androgen receptor regulator, significantly repressing transcription when knocked down using a silencing RNA approach and activating transcription when overexpressed. We have also identified a functional nuclear localization signal at the COOH terminus of HIP1, which contributes to the nuclear translocation of the protein. In conclusion, we have discovered that HIP1 is a nucleocytoplasmic protein capable of associating with membranes and DNA response elements and regulating transcription."
16033069	Polymorphisms of human androgen receptor (hAR) gene in prostate cancer cell lines PC-EW and PC-OR.	"BACKGROUND: Prostate cancer is the leading tumor of the male in Western societies. Genetic alterations of the androgen receptor gene are known in the advanced metastatic disease. In this study, the androgen receptor gene was tested in two human prostate cancer cell lines, the androgen-sensitive PC-EW and the androgen-independent PC-OR. MATERIALS AND METHODS: Genomic DNA was isolated from two cell lines from metastatic prostate adenocarcinoma in heterotransplanted male athymic nude (nu/nu) Balb/c mice. Mutation screening was performed by sequencing of exons 1-8 of the human androgen receptor gene. RESULTS: Despite two polymorphisms found in the transactivation domain of hAR exon 1, no point mutations were detected in the hAR gene of both cell lines. CONCLUSION: Point mutations of hAR are not necessary for metastatic prostate cancer, while alterations in the solyglutamine and polyglycine repeat region in exon 1 of the MR gene are more often found. These repeats are two of many genetic influences that contribute to the overall risk of developing prostate cancer."
16037637	NMD microarray analysis for rapid genome-wide screen of mutated genes in cancer.	"Gene mutations play a critical role in cancer development and progression, and their identification offers possibilities for accurate diagnostics and therapeutic targeting. Finding genes undergoing mutations is challenging and slow, even in the post-genomic era. A new approach was recently developed by Noensie and Dietz to prioritize and focus the search, making use of nonsense-mediated mRNA decay (NMD) inhibition and microarray analysis (NMD microarrays) in the identification of transcripts containing nonsense mutations. We combined NMD microarrays with array-based CGH (comparative genomic hybridization) in order to identify inactivation of tumor suppressor genes in cancer. Such a ""mutatomics"" screening of prostate cancer cell lines led to the identification of inactivating mutations in the EPHB2 gene. Up to 8% of metastatic uncultured prostate cancers also showed mutations of this gene whose loss of function may confer loss of tissue architecture. NMD microarray analysis could turn out to be a powerful research method to identify novel mutated genes in cancer cell lines, providing targets that could then be further investigated for their clinical relevance and therapeutic potential."
16049007	Tumor-suppressive maspin regulates cell response to oxidative stress by direct interaction with glutathione S-transferase.	"Maspin, a novel serine protease inhibitor, suppresses tumor progression in several cancer models, including an in vivo model for prostate cancer bone metastasis. However, the molecular mechanism of maspin remains illusive, primarily because its molecular targets are unknown. To this end, we used a full-length maspin cDNA bait to screen against both a primary prostate tumor cDNA prey library and a HeLa cDNA prey library by the yeast two-hybrid method. We found that heat shock protein 90, glutathione S-transferase (GST), and heat shock protein 70 interacted with maspin with the highest frequencies. We confirmed the maspin/GST interaction using purified proteins, human epithelial cell lines, and human prostate tissues. A maspin variant that has a point mutation of Arg(340) to Ala (Mas(R340A)) showed a significantly decreased affinity for GST. Although purified maspin had no effect on the activity of purified GST in vitro, intracellular interaction between endogenous maspin and GST correlated with an elevated total GST activity in both MDA-MB-435- and DU145-derived stably transfected cells. Consistently, tumor cells treated with purified wild type maspin, but not Mas(R340A), enhanced cellular GST activity. Maspin expression in cancer cell lines also correlated with decreased basal levels of reactive oxygen species (ROS). Furthermore, H(2)O(2) treatment not only induced GST expression but also increased intracellular maspin/GST interaction, which was inversely correlated with the level of ROS generation. Conversely, maspin knockdown by small interfering RNA increased the basal, as well as H(2)O(2)-induced, ROS generation. Furthermore, the maspin effect on ROS generation was completely abolished by a GST inhibitor, indicating an essential role of GST in maspin-mediated cellular response to oxidative stress. Consistently, oxidative stress-induced vascular endothelial growth factor A expression was significantly inhibited in maspin-expressing cells. Together, our data suggest a new mechanism by which maspin, through its direct interaction with GST, may inhibit oxidative stress-induced ROS generation and vascular endothelial growth factor A induction, thus preventing further adverse effects on tumor genetics and stromal reactivity."
16079302	Human expanded polyglutamine androgen receptor mutants in neurodegeneration as a novel ligand target.	"Androgen receptor (AR) plays key roles in various biological events, including pathological processes such as prostate cancer, androgen-insensitive syndrome, and spinal and bulbar muscular atrophy (SBMA). SBMA is caused by mutation of the expanded polyglutamine (polyQ) stretches in the AR gene. Recently, we established a Drosophila SBMA model that expresses the expanded polyQ hAR mutant in eyes, which monitors neurodegeneration as a rough eye phenotype. In addition, we showed that androgen binding to the mutant hAR causes structural alterations, leading to the onset of neurodegeneration in the fly eyes. In the present study, we examined whether the ligand-induced neurodegeneration via the hAR mutant is coupled with the known ligand-induced transactivation function of hAR. By testing several known AR antagonists and several of their structure-related compounds, we unexpectedly found that none of the AR ligands antagonized the hAR mutant neurodegeneration function, and surprisingly, compound 4-(4,4-dimethyl-2,5-dioxo-1-imidazolidinyl)-2-trifluoromethylbenzonitrile (RU56279) was more potent in inducing neurodegeneration. However, in vitro and in vivo mammalian assays showed that RU56279 exhibited the expected antagonistic activity with the same potency as those of the other compounds. Thus, these findings suggest the presence of a novel ligand-induced function of the polyQ hAR mutant in neurodegeneration that could not be prevented by known antagonists for the hAR transactivation function."
16110761	Prognostic value of DNA analysis of prostate adenocarcinoma: correlation to clinicopathologic predictors.	"The ability to accurately predict tumor behavior and patient survival is a problem in managing patients with prostate cancer. DNA ploidy provides important information for the evaluation of the prognosis of prostate cancer. The aim of this study was to investigate the DNA ploidy in imprints from prostate adenocarcinomas in a group of 70 patients in relation to Gleason score, tumor differentiation, stage and PSA serum levels. The DNA content was studied in Feulgen-stained imprint smears through the image analysis technique using a SAMBA 2005 Image analyzer. According to our measurements, a strong correlation was observed between DNA ploidy status and tumor differentiation (p<0.001). A statistically significant difference was found between DNA aneuploidy and increased pretreatment PSA serum levels (>4 ng/ml) (p<0.001), as well as between ploidy pattern and stage of the disease (p<0.001). Our results conclude that DNA ploidy status appears to be an additional marker in the field of prognosis of prostatic adenocarcinoma and could provide useful information on the potential behavior of prostate cancer."
16130014	Genome-wide screening for genetic changes in a matched pair of benign and prostate cancer cell lines using array CGH.	"Copy number alterations in a matched pair of benign epithelial and prostate cancer cell lines derived from the same patient were assessed using array-based comparative genomic hybridisation (aCGH). The cancer cell line showed a gain of chromosome 7, deletion of chromosome 8, gains (including high level) and losses on chromosome 11, loss of 18p and gain of 20q. Deletions on chromosome 8 were confirmed with microsatellite markers. The aCGH results were compared to gene expression data obtained using DNA microarrays and suggested the involvement of caspases and ICEBERG on 11q and E2F1 on chromosome 20q."
16155194	A common nonsense mutation in EphB2 is associated with prostate cancer risk in African American men with a positive family history.	"BACKGROUND: The EphB2 gene was recently implicated as a prostate cancer (PC) tumour suppressor gene, with somatic inactivating mutations occurring in approximately 10% of sporadic tumours. We evaluated the contribution of EphB2 to inherited PC susceptibility in African Americans (AA) by screening the gene for germline polymorphisms. METHODS: Direct sequencing of the coding region of EphB2 was performed on 72 probands from the African American Hereditary Prostate Cancer Study (AAHPC). A case-control association analysis was then carried out using the AAHPC probands and an additional 183 cases of sporadic PC compared with 329 healthy AA male controls. In addition, we performed an ancestry adjusted association study where we adjusted for individual ancestry among all subjects, in order to rule out a spurious association due to population stratification. RESULTS: Ten coding sequence variants were identified, including the K1019X (3055A-->T) nonsense mutation which was present in 15.3% of the AAHPC probands but only 1.7% of 231 European American (EA) control samples. We observed that the 3055A-->T mutation significantly increased risk for prostate cancer over twofold (Fisher's two sided test, p = 0.003). The T allele was significantly more common among AAHPC probands (15.3%) than among healthy AA male controls (5.2%) (odds ratio 3.31; 95% confidence interval 1.5 to 7.4; p = 0.008). The ancestry adjusted analyses confirmed the association. CONCLUSIONS: Our data show that the K1019X mutation in the EphB2 gene differs in frequency between AA and EA, is associated with increased risk for PC in AA men with a positive family history, and may be an important genetic risk factor for prostate cancer in AA."
16173030	Cytogenetic and expression profiles associated with transformation to androgen-resistant prostate cancer.	"BACKGROUND: The mechanisms underlying the progression of prostate cancer to androgen-resistant cancer are still not fully understood. Here, we studied the genetic events associated with this transformation. METHODS: The androgen sensitive prostate cancer cells line LNCaP-FGC and its androgen resistant subline LNCaP-r were investigated using SKY, CGH, and cDNA microarray. RESULTS: Karyotypically, several additional chromosomal aberrations were seen in LNCaP-r as compared to the parental line. CGH also revealed unique net chromosomal alterations in LNCaP-r compared to LNCaP-FGC, including gain of 2p13-23, 2q21-32, and 13q and loss of 6p22-pter. cDNA microarray analysis identified several genes involved in DNA methylation, such as DNMT2, DNMT3a, and methyl-CpG binding domain protein 2 and 4 that were higher expressed in LNCaP-r. Interestingly, androgen responsiveness of LNCaP-r was restored after treated with DNA methyltransferase inhibitor. CONCLUSIONS: Our findings may serve as a basis for molecular dissection of the mechanisms involved in development of androgen resistant prostate cancer."
16173036	"Glutathione S-transferase M1, T1, and P1 polymorphisms and prostate cancer risk in middle-aged men."	"BACKGROUND: The glutathione S-transferase (GST) enzymes detoxify several carcinogens. Genetic polymorphisms in GSTM1, T1, and P1 (Ile105Val) have been associated with prostate cancer, however, results have been inconsistent across studies. METHODS: Data from a population-based case-control study in King County, Washington, were used to further evaluate the relationships between these GST polymorphisms and prostate cancer. Incident cases (n = 590) were 40-64 years old, diagnosed from 1993 through 1996, and identified via the SEER cancer registry. Controls (n = 538) were identified via random digit dialing, and frequency age-matched to cases. Logistic regression was used to estimate odds ratios (OR) and 95% confidence intervals (CI). RESULTS: Risk of prostate cancer was moderately increased among Caucasians with the GSTM1-null genotype (OR = 1.54; 95% CI 1.19-2.01). There were no associations for either GSTT1 or P1(Ile105Val). The association between the GSTM1-null genotype and prostate cancer was not different according to cancer aggressiveness defined by stage at diagnosis and Gleason score. Among GSTM1-null Caucasians, the relative risk of prostate cancer increased linearly with increasing pack-years of smoking (P-value for trend = 0.007), with the highest ORs observed for smokers of >30 pack-years. CONCLUSIONS: Findings suggest that the GSTM1-null genotype defines a subgroup of men at higher risk of prostate cancer, particularly if they are heavy smokers."
16195410	Gonadotropin-releasing hormone induces actin cytoskeleton remodeling and affects cell migration in a cell-type-specific manner in TSU-Pr1 and DU145 cells.	"GnRH was first identified as the hypothalamic decapeptide that promotes gonadotropin release from pituitary gonadotropes. Thereafter, direct stimulatory and inhibitory effects of GnRH on cell proliferation were demonstrated in a number of types of primary cultured cells and established cell lines. Recently, the effects of GnRH on cell attachment, cytoskeleton remodeling, and cell migration have also been reported. Thus, the effects of GnRH on various cell activities are of great interest among researchers who study the actions of GnRH. In this study, we demonstrated that GnRH induces actin cytoskeleton remodeling and affects cell migration using two human prostatic carcinoma cell lines, TSU-Pr1 and DU145. In TSU-Pr1, GnRH-I and -II induced the filopodia formation of the cells and promoted cell migration, whereas in DU145, GnRH-I and -II induced the formation of the cells with stress fiber and inhibited cell migration. In our previous studies, we reported the stimulatory and inhibitory effects of GnRH on the cell proliferation of TSU-Pr1 and DU145 cells. This study provides the first evidence for the effects of GnRH on actin cytoskeleton remodeling and cell migration of cells in which cell proliferation was affected by GnRH at the same time. Moreover, we also demonstrated that the same human GnRH receptor subtype, human type I GnRH receptor, is essential for the effects of GnRH-I and -II on actin cytoskeleton remodeling and cell migration in both TSU-Pr1 and DU145 cells using the technique of gene knock-down by RNA interference."
16217763	"Ala228 variant of trail receptor 1 affecting the ligand binding site is associated with chronic lymphocytic leukemia, mantle cell lymphoma, prostate cancer, head and neck squamous cell carcinoma and bladder cancer."	"Allelic loss of chromosome 8p21-22 is a frequent event in various human cancers including mantle cell lymphoma (MCL), prostate cancer, head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) and bladder cancer. The tumor necrosis factor-related apoptosis inducing ligand (TRAIL) receptors, including TNFRSF10A and TNFRSF10B, are located within this chromosomal region. Since recent studies demonstrate that chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) and prostate cells are TRAIL induced apoptosis, TRAIL-receptors are strong tumor suppressor candidate genes in human cancers exhibiting loss of chromosomal material in 8p21.3. However, no mutation of the TRAIL receptor genes has been reported in CLL, MCL, prostate cancer, HNSCC so far. In this study we analyzed the complete coding region of TNFRSF10A and TNFRSF10B in a series of 32 MCL and 101 CLL samples and detected a single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) in TNFRSF10A (A683C) with tumor specific allele distribution. We examined allele distribution in 395 samples of different tumor entities (prostate cancer, n = 43; HNSCC, n = 40; bladder cancer, n = 179) and compared them to 137 samples from healthy probands. We found the rare allele of TNFRSF10A is more frequent in CLL, MCL, prostate cancer, bladder cancer and HNSCC. The A683C polymorphism did not cosegregate with other TNFRSF10A polymorphisms previously described. Thus screening for 683A-->C nucleotide exchanges may become important in diagnosis and/or treatment of these malignancies."
16276089	Molecular characterisation of the t(1;15)(p22;q22) translocation in the prostate cancer cell line LNCaP.	"Although chromosome translocations are well-documented recurrent events in hematological malignancies and soft tissue sarcomas, their significance in carcinomas is less clear. We report here the molecular characterization of the reciprocal translocation t(1;15)(p22;q22) in the prostate carcinoma cell line, LNCaP. The chromosome 1 breakpoint was localized to a single BAC clone, RP11-290M5, by sequential FISH analysis of clones selected from the NCBI chromosome 1 map. This was further refined to a 580-bp region by Southern blot analysis. A 2.85-kb fragment spanning the der(1) breakpoint was amplified by long-range inverse PCR. The breakpoint on chromosome 1 was shown to lie between the CYR61 and the DDAH1 genes with the der(1) junctional sequence linking the CYR61 gene to the TSPAN3 (TM4SF8) gene on chromosome 15. Confirmatory PCR and FISH mapping of the der(15) showed loss of chromosome material proximal to the breakpoint on chromosome 15, containing the PSTPIP1 and RCN2 genes. On the available evidence we conclude that this translocation does not result in an in-frame gene fusion. Comparative expressed sequence hybridization (CESH) and comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) analysis, showed relative down-regulation of gene expression surrounding the breakpoint, but no gross change in genomic copy number. Real-time quantitative RT-PCR for genes around the breakpoint supported the CESH data. Therefore, here we may have revealed a gene down-regulation mechanism associated with a chromosome translocation, either through small deletion at the breakpoint or through another means of chromosome domain related gene regulation."
16322288	Ghrelin and a novel preproghrelin isoform are highly expressed in prostate cancer and ghrelin activates mitogen-activated protein kinase in prostate cancer.	"PURPOSE: There is evidence that the hormone ghrelin stimulates proliferation in the PC3 prostate cancer cell line although the underlying mechanism(s) remain to be determined. A novel, exon 3-deleted preproghrelin isoform has previously been detected in breast and prostate cancer cells; however, its characterization, expression, and potential function in prostate cancer tissues are unknown. EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Expression of ghrelin and exon 3-deleted preproghrelin was investigated in prostate cancer cell lines and tissues by reverse transcription-PCR and immunohistochemistry. Proliferation and apoptosis assays were done in the LNCaP prostate cancer cell line to determine if ghrelin stimulates proliferation and/or cell survival. Stimulation of mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway activation by ghrelin was determined in PC3 and LNCaP cells by immunoblotting with antibodies specific for phosphorylated MAPKs. RESULTS: Prostate cancer tissues display greater immunoreactivity for ghrelin and exon 3-deleted preproghrelin than normal prostate tissues, and prostate cancer cell lines secrete mature ghrelin into conditioned medium. Treatment with ghrelin (10 nmol/L), but not the unique COOH-terminal peptide derived from exon 3-deleted preproghrelin, stimulates proliferation in the LNCaP cells (45.0 +/- 1.7% above control, P < 0.01) and rapidly activates the extracellular signal-regulated kinase-1/2 MAPK pathway in both PC3 and LNCaP cell lines. Ghrelin, however, does not protect prostate cancer cells from apoptosis induced by actinomycin D (1 microg/mL). The MAPK inhibitors PD98059 and U0126 blocked ghrelin-induced MAPK activation, as well as proliferation, in both cell lines. CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest that these components of the ghrelin axis may have potential as novel biomarkers and/or adjunctive therapeutic targets for prostate cancer."
16335537	Immunologically defined subclasses of the protein kinase CK2 beta-subunit in prostate carcinoma cell lines.	"Both, the activity as well as the expression of protein kinase CK2 is enhanced in various cancer types and in established tumour cell lines. This phenomenon is not due to an increase in the CK2 message but rather to posttranscriptional and posttranslational mechanisms. In order to get an insight into these posttranslational modifications we analyzed CK2 in prostate cancer cell lines, which differ by their hormone-sensitivity. We found that the CK2 activity is significantly higher in hormone-refractory than in hormone-sensitive cells although the amount of the catalytic alpha- and alpha'- subunits is comparable. In contrast, we detected seemingly lower amounts of the regulatory beta-subunit in the hormone-refractory cell lines, which later turned out to be an immunologically defined subclass. This subclass is realized by a phosphate group, which is attached to serine 209. The phosphorylation occurs in vivo during mitosis and is executed by the p34(cdc2)/cyclin B kinase. As this phosphorylation enhances the CK2 activity this change might well account for the higher activity of CK2 in prostate cancer cells."
1638499	Cytogenetics of primary prostatic adenocarcinoma. Clonality and chromosome instability.	"We have examined 62 prostatic adenocarcinomas by conventional cytogenetic analysis. Most were primary cultures harvested in 14 days or less. The most consistent finding was a normal male diploid karyotype, found in 87% of all cells analyzed, and as the exclusive finding in 19 tumors. Nonrandom chromosomal changes included gain of chromosome 7 and loss of the Y chromosome. In addition, clonal gains of chromosomes 8, 12, and 18, and clonal losses of chromosomes 14 and 19 were noted in individual cases. Two structural clonal aberrations, a 9p+ in one case and a t(Y;22) (q11.2;p12) in another, were also seen. Ten of 62 cultures demonstrated chromosome instability, defined herein as nonclonal gain or loss of chromosomes in more than 10% of the metaphases examined from that culture. In those cases with nonclonal numerical aberrations, loss of chromosomes was more common than gain. The distribution of apparently random numeric abnormalities was similar to that of the clonal abnormalities in that the most frequent nonclonal gain was of chromosome 7 and the most frequent nonclonal loss was of the Y chromosome. Apparently random structural aberrations were observed in less than 1% of all analyzed cells. These included a 4p-,del(3)(q13), and t(1;11). The extent of apparently random aneuploidy suggests that chromosome instability characterizes cultured prostatic adenocarcinomas. An increase in the frequency of nonclonal aberrations may be an indicator of tumor origin in a predominantly diploid cell population. The coexistence of clonally aberrant, nonclonally aberrant, and normal diploid cells in culture may reflect heterogeneity of prostate tumors in vivo."
16413100	Mitogen-activated protein kinase signaling is activated in prostate tumors but not mediated by B-RAF mutations.	"OBJECTIVES: A dysregulated mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway plays an important role in various malignancies and is often mediated by mutations in several oncogenes (eg, RAF, RAS). B-RAF mutations, predominantly the specific V600E mutation and additional alterations in exons 11 and 15, were frequently detected in malignant melanomas, papillary thyroid tumors, and colorectal cancers with microsatellite instability (MSI). The present study investigated B-RAF mutations, MSI status, and activation of MAPK signaling in prostate tumors. METHODS: The V600E mutation of the B-RAF gene was analyzed using allele-specific polymerase chain reaction in 79 archival prostatic adenocarcinomas (pT1aG1 to pT3cG3, median Gleason score 6); exons 11 and 15 were sequenced. MSI status was determined using the National Cancer Institute consensus panel for hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal carcinoma (HNPCC) detection. Active MAPK signaling was investigated using immunohistochemistry for p44/ERK1 and p42/ERK2. RESULTS: No B-RAF mutations could be detected. Six of 79 tumors showed MSI positivity. Active MAPK signaling was detected in 51% of the analyzed tumors. No correlation was found between MAPK activity and histopathologic/clinical characteristics. CONCLUSION: The most frequent B-RAF gene alterations are not involved in prostate carcinogenesis. MSI is infrequent in prostate cancer and is not linked to B-RAF mutations. MAPK signaling is frequently activated in prostate tumors and might be suitable for a therapeutic approach."
16432235	Pten deletion leads to the expansion of a prostatic stem/progenitor cell subpopulation and tumor initiation.	"PTEN (phosphatase and tensin homolog deleted on chromosome 10) is a potent tumor suppressor gene frequently mutated in human prostate cancers. Deletion of Pten in a murine model of prostate cancer recapitulates the disease progression seen in humans. Using defined cell lineage markers, we demonstrate that PTEN negatively regulates p63-positive prostatic basal cell proliferation without blocking differentiation. Concomitant with basal cell proliferation is the expansion of a prostate stem/progenitor-like subpopulation as evidenced by the progressive increase of stem cell antigen-1 (Sca-1)- and BCL-2-positive cells. This observation provides strong evidence that basal cell proliferation can be an initiating event for precancerous lesions. Sca-1(+) and BCL-2(+) progenitors may serve as cancer-initiating cells in this model."
16449656	Induction of nitric oxide synthase-dependent telomere shortening after functional inhibition of Hsp90 in human tumor cells.	"In most cancer cells, the lengths of telomeres, the functional DNA-protein complexes located at chromosome ends, are maintained by the ribonucleoprotein telomerase. Hsp90 facilitates the assembly of telomerase and remains associated with the functional complex, implying a direct involvement of Hsp90 in telomere length regulation. In an effort to elucidate the effects of Hsp90 inhibition on function and viability of human prostate cancer cells, both pharmacological (radicicol) and genetic (small interfering RNA) approaches were utilized to target Hsp90. Depletion of functional Hsp90 caused dramatic telomere shortening followed by apoptosis. Of particular significance, these cells exhibit a high level of nitric oxide synthase (NOS)-dependent free radical production, and simultaneous treatment of cells with the NOS inhibitor L-NAME resulted in telomere elongation and prevention of apoptosis. In addition, we observe significant DNA damage assessed by telomere dysfunction, although in the absence of a classical DNA damage response. Overall, our data suggest a novel mechanism whereby inhibition of Hsp90 disrupts free radical homeostasis and contributes directly to telomere erosion, further implicating Hsp90 as a potential therapeutic target for cancer cells."
16456618	Unfaithfulness and promiscuity of a mutant androgen receptor in a hormone-refractory prostate cancer.	"Missense mutations in the androgen receptor (AR) contribute to the failure of hormonal therapy for prostate cancer (PCa), but the underlying molecular bases remain uncharacterized. Here, we describe a new AR variant found in a hormone-refractory metastatic PCa, in which threonine 575 in the DNA binding domain, and threonine 877 in the ligand-binding domain, were both replaced by an alanine. Using gene reporter assays, we demonstrate that the T575A mutation weakened transcriptional activity from promoters containing AR-specific responsive elements, while activity from promoters with AR-non-specific elements was enhanced. Data from gel shift experiments revealed a preferential binding of the T575A mutant to AR-non-specific motifs. We demonstrate that the two mutations T575A and T877A cooperate to confer new functional properties on the AR, and that the mutant AR functions simultaneously as a promiscuous AR due to the T877A mutation, and an unfaithful AR due to the T575A mutation."
16470536	"Allelotyping analysis at chromosome arm 8p of high-grade prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia and incidental, latent, and clinical prostate cancers."	"In this study, we used 7 informative microsatellite markers at 8p22, 23.1, and 23.2 in Japanese patients to compare frequency of loss of heterozygosity (LOH) in 53 lesions of high-grade prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia (HGPIN), 38 cases (38 lesions) of incidental prostate cancer (IPC), 31 cases (41 lesions) of latent prostate cancer (LPC), and 102 cases (168 lesions) of clinical prostate cancer (CPC). The frequency of LOH at 8p22-23.2 with at least 1 marker was 0%, 33%, 57%, and 51% in the HGPIN, IPC, LPC, and CPC cases, respectively. No statistically significant difference was found at 8p22-23.2 between the types of prostate cancer. However, the frequency of 8p22 deletion was significantly higher in CPC and LPC cases than in IPC cases (P = 0.0003) or lesions (P = 0.0017). The frequency of LOH at 8p22 and 8p23.1 loci in high-grade tumors was significantly higher than in low-grade tumors in both the LPCs/IPCs and CPCs (P < 0.05). Allelic loss at 8p22 was significantly more frequent in CPC than in IPC (P = 0.002) and in pT4 CPC than in earlier-stage CPC (P = 0.038). These findings suggest that deletion of 8p is an important event in both the initiation and metastasis of prostate cancer. The extremely high frequency of LOH at 8p22-23.1 in high-grade tumors suggests the existence of a novel putative tumor-suppressor gene associated with the progression of prostate cancer. These results should be useful in identifying the target gene of deletion at 8p."
16489020	Cooperation between FGF8b overexpression and PTEN deficiency in prostate tumorigenesis.	"Two commonly occurring genetic aberrations of human prostate cancer [i.e., overexpression of a mitogenic polypeptide (fibroblast growth factor 8, isoform b or FGF8b) and loss of function of PTEN tumor suppressor] were recapitulated into a new combinatorial mouse model. This model harboring the Fgf8b transgene and haploinsufficiency in Pten, both in a prostate epithelium-specific manner, yielded prostatic adenocarcinoma with readily detectable lymph node metastases, whereas single models with each of the defects were shown earlier to progress generally only up to prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia (PIN). In addition to late age-related development of typical adenocarcinoma, the model also displayed a low incidence of mucinous adenocarcinoma, a rare variant type of human prostatic adenocarcinoma. The cooperation between FGF8b activation and PTEN deficiency must be linked to acquisition of additional genetic alterations for the progression of the lesions to primary adenocarcinoma. Here, we identified loss of heterozygosity at the Pten gene leading to bialleic loss, as a necessary secondary event, indicating that a complete loss of PTEN function is required in the development of invasive cancer in the model. Analyses of expression of downstream mediators phospho-AKT (p-AKT) and p27(KIP1), in various types of lesions, however, revealed a complex picture. Although PIN lesions displayed relatively strong expression of p-AKT and p27(KIP1), there was a notable heterogeneity with variable decrease in their immunostaining in adenocarcinomas. Together, the results further underscore the notion that besides activation of AKT by loss of PTEN function, other PTEN-regulated pathways must be operative for progression of lesions from PIN to adenocarcinoma."
16607754	Molecular mechanisms in hormone-resistant prostate cancer.	"Prostate cancer is the most common malignancy in males. Despite the efforts for an early diagnosis, approximately one third of the cases are diagnosed in advanced clinical stages. Prostatic cancer, as the function of normal prostate is dependent upon androgens. So, androgenic deprivation represents an effective treatment especially in advanced cases. Although, the majority of patients will initially respond to androgen blockade, consequently the hormone-resistance will develop and the tumor will progress. The mechanism that determines tumoral progression during the endocrine treatment is driven by genomic instability, characterized by activating mutations of androgen receptor gene (AR), progression of some cellular clones possible of neuroendocrine origin that become adapted to low concentrations of residual adrenal androgens, suppression of apoptosis, by bcl-2 oncogene overexpression and p53 mutations, and growth factors (IGF-1--Insulin-like growth factor, KGF--keratinocyte growth factor, EGF--Epidermal growth factor, TGF a, b- Transforming growth factor a and b, bFGF--Fibroblastic growth factor type b) regulatory effect through either a paracrine or an autocrine mechanism. The identification of molecular alterations that appear during prostate carcinogenesis, may lead to the identification of new molecular targets to prevent hormone-resistance and to improve the prognosis in prostate cancers."
16637072	Germline ATBF1 mutations and prostate cancer risk.	"BACKGROUND: ATBF1 has been recently identified as a candidate prostate tumor suppressor gene. In addition to more unique mutations, two somatic mutations (shortening of a polypyrimidine tract [Poly(T)n] and a deletion beginning at codon 3381 (3381del)) were each observed in multiple prostate cancer samples and both appear to have an impact on ATBF1 gene function and expression. METHODS: We assayed two recurrent sequence variants in germline DNA from prostate cancer cases and controls, and examined whether carriers of these variants are at increased risk for prostate cancer. RESULTS: We found Poly(T)n variants in both normal and matched tumor DNA samples from multiple patients, indicating a germline origin in each case. Genotyping germline DNA samples indicated that 3381del was significantly associated with prostate cancer risk among sporadic cases (P = 0.03), but not among men with hereditary disease. CONCLUSIONS: Our study indicates that the germline 3381del allele may influence prostate cancer susceptibility."
16648550	Molecular alterations after Polo-like kinase 1 mRNA suppression versus pharmacologic inhibition in cancer cells.	"Multiple roles within mitosis have been assigned to Polo-like kinase 1 (Plk1), making it an attractive candidate for mitotic targeting of cancer cells. We have employed chimeric antisense oligonucleotides to investigate the molecular alterations after targeted interference with Plk1 in RKO human colon adenocarcinoma and PC3 prostate cancer cells. Suppression of Plk1 mRNA resulted in a dramatic increase of the mitotic index followed by the onset of apoptosis. Mitotically arrested cells displayed randomly separated condensed chromosomes and the occurrence of multiple spindle poles with well-formed asters. Induction of apoptosis was strictly dependent on cell cycle progression: Genetically engineered RKO cells with inducible expression of the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p27(Kip1) were completely refractory to Plk1 depletion-induced apoptosis when they were arrested in the G1 phase of the cell cycle. Various mitotic markers, including MPM-2, cdc25c, cyclin B1, or phosphorylated histone H3, were investigated to explore the molecular consequences of Plk1 depletion. Whereas most marker proteins showed similar alterations compared with treatment with paclitaxel, cdc25c was fully phosphorylated solely in paclitaxel-treated cells but only partially phosphorylated in Plk1-depleted cells, although both treatments caused a profound mitotic arrest. This differential phosphorylation of cdc25c was used to test whether a pharmacologic inhibitor of Plk1 would exert the same cellular effects as interference with Plk1 on a mRNA level. It was found that the differential electrophoretic mobility of cdc25c can serve as a reliable molecular marker to track inhibition of Plk1 by small-molecule inhibitors within a cell."
1666242	Nuclear hormone receptor variants: their role in malignancy and progression to hormone resistance in cancer.	"Structural variants of nuclear hormone receptors have been found in tumour tissues. Experimental evidence suggests two ways in which these variants may have oncogenic potential: 1. by suppressing the action of the normal hormone receptor, thereby acting as dominant negative oncogenes; 2. by activating hormone-responsive genes in a hormone-independent manner. These mechanisms may not only contribute to oncogenesis but also to the development of hormone resistance in tumours, e.g. breast and prostate cancer."
1674204	Molecular genetics and human prostatic carcinoma.	"Advances in molecular genetic techniques have reached the point where clinical material can be reasonably well-characterized in detail. One area that is receiving increasing attention is the genetic abnormalities of tumors. Using the technique of restriction fragment length polymorphism analysis, it is possible today to build up a picture of the genome and to identify which regions are deleted or are rearranged in the tumor cells of an individual patient. Twenty years ago, experimental and theoretical findings suggested that loss of gene function could be an essential component in oncogenesis. Such genes have been named tumor suppressor genes. The significance of the consistent loss of specific regions of genetic information from the genomes of tumor cells of a particular histological type is now appreciated, as such areas may contain as yet unrecognized tumor suppressor genes. The characterization of regions consistently lost thus forms the first step in localizing such genes. We have applied this technology to the study of prostate cancer and our preliminary findings show consistent losses of genetic information from chromosomes 8, 10, and 16."
16764542	Analysis of prostate-specific membrane antigen splice variants in LNCap cells.	"The prostate-specific membrane antigen (PSMA), a product of the folate hydrolase (FOLH1) gene, is highly expressed as a largely extracellular membrane-anchored protein in malignant prostate tissues and in nonprostatic tumor neovasculature. Treatment of prostate cancer LNCap cells with spliceswitching oligonucleotides (SSOs) modulated splicing of FOLH1 pre-mRNA from the full-length PSMA splice variant to three splice variants: the cytoplasmic PSM', alternatively spliced at exon 1, and the previously unexamined PSMADelta6 and PSMADelta18 variants, which lack exons 6 and 18, respectively. Application of SSOs decreased membrane PSMA levels and increased PSM', PSMADelta6, and PSMADelta18 transcripts. As a result, PSM' protein was translocated to the cytoplasm, and switching to PSMADelta6 and PSMADelta18 downregulated PSMA expression. NAALADase assays showed that PSM' retained enzymatic activity. PSMADelta6 and PSMADelta18 were not active, presumably due to a change in a reading frame that eliminated the NAALDase active site or the dimerization domain or both in these proteins."
16789753	Antitumor agents. 250. Design and synthesis of new curcumin analogues as potential anti-prostate cancer agents.	"In a continuing study of curcumin analogues as potential drug candidates to treat prostate cancer at both androgen-dependent and androgen-refractory stages, we designed and synthesized over 40 new analogues classified into four series: monophenyl analogues (series A), heterocycle-containing analogues (series B), analogues bearing various substituents on the phenyl rings (series C), and analogues with various linkers (series D). These new compounds were tested for cytotoxicity against two human prostate cancer cell lines, androgen-dependent LNCaP and androgen-independent PC-3. Antiandrogenic activity was also evaluated in LNCaP cells and PC-3 cells transfected with wild-type androgen receptor. Ten compounds possessed potent cytotoxicity against both LNCaP and PC-3 cells, seven only against LNCaP, and one solely against PC-3. This study established an advanced structure-activity relationship (SAR), and these correlations will guide the further design of new curcumin analogues with better anti-prostate cancer activity."
16800821	Two-step transcriptional amplification-lipid-based nanoparticles using PSMA or midkine promoter for suicide gene therapy in prostate cancer.	"A two-step transcriptional amplification system (TSTA) was used to enhance the efficacy of suicide gene therapy for treatment of prostate cancer. We designed a TSTA system and constructed two types of plasmid: one containing GAL4-VP16 fusion protein under the control of a tumor-specific promoter, the other containing luciferase or herpes simplex virus thymidine kinase (HSV-tk) under the control of a synthetic promoter. The TSTA systems using nanoparticles based on lipids were evaluated by measuring the amount of induced luciferase activity as a function of prostate-specific membrane antigen (PSMA) and midkine (Mk) promoters, specific for LNCaP and PC-3 prostate cancer cells, respectively. In LNCaP cells that were PSMA-positive, the TSTA system featuring the PSMA enhancer and promoter exhibited activity that was 640-fold greater than a system consisting of one-step transcription with the PSMA promoter. In contrast, this difference in activity did not occur in PSMA-negative PC-3 cells. In Mk-positive PC-3 cells, the TSTA system with the Mk promoter exhibited a five-fold increase in activity over one-step transcription, but such activity was not induced in Mk-negative LNCaP cells. When using HSV-tk for suicide gene therapy, TSTA systems featuring the PSMA or Mk promoter inhibited in vitro cell growth in the presence of ganciclovir. Furthermore, the TSTA system featuring the Mk promoter suppressed in vivo growth of PC-3 tumor xenografts to a greater extent than one-step transcription. These findings show that TSTA systems can enhance PSMA and Mk promoter activities and selectively inhibit PC-3 cell growth in tumors. This suggests that TSTA systems featuring tumor-specific promoters are suitable for cancer treatment by gene therapy."
16814806	Physical and functional interactions between the prostate suppressor homeoprotein NKX3.1 and serum response factor.	"The NKX3.1 transcription factor is an NK family homeodomain protein and a tumor suppressor gene that is haploinsufficient and down-regulated in the early phases of prostate cancer. Like its cardiac homolog, NKX2.5, NKX3.1 acts synergistically with serum response factor (SRF) to activate expression from the smooth muscle gamma-actin (SMGA) gene promoter. Using NMR spectroscopy, three conserved motifs in a construct containing the N-terminal region and homeodomain of NKX3.1 were observed to interact with the MADS box domain of SRF. These motifs interacted both in the absence of DNA and when both proteins were bound to a SMGA promoter DNA sequence. No significant interaction was seen between the homeodomain and SRF MADS box. One of the SRF-interacting regions was the tinman (TN) or engrailed homology-1 motif (EH-1), residues 29-35 (FLIQDIL), which for other NK proteins is the site of interaction with the repressor protein Groucho. A second hydrophobic interacting region was designated the SRF-interacting (SI) motif and included residues 99-105 (LGSYLLD). A third interacting motif was the acidic region adjacent to the SI motif including residues 88-96 (ETLAETEPE). The acidic domain (AD) motif signals also showed strengthening upon the NKX3.1 homeodomain binding to DNA in the absence of SRF, consistent with the acidic region weakly interacting with the homeodomain in the unbound state. The importance of these linear motifs in the transcriptional interaction of NKX3.1 and SRF was demonstrated by targeted mutagenesis of an NKX3.1 expression vector in a SMGA reporter assay. The results implicate the NKX3.1 N-terminal region in regulation of transcriptional activity of this tumor suppressor."
16820092	Three-color FISH analysis of TMPRSS2/ERG fusions in prostate cancer indicates that genomic microdeletion of chromosome 21 is associated with rearrangement.	The recent description of novel recurrent gene fusions in approximately 80% of prostate cancer (PCa) cases has generated increased interest in the search for new translocations in other epithelial cancers and emphasizes the importance of understanding the origins and biologic implications of these genomic rearrangements. Analysis of 15 PCa cases by reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction was used to detect six ERG-related gene fusion transcripts with TMPRSS2. No TMPRSS2/ETV1 chimeric fusion was detected in this series. Three-color fluorescence in situ hybridization confirms that TMPRSS2/ERG fusion may be accompanied by a small hemizygous sequence deletion on chromosome 21 between ERG and TMPRSS2 genes. Analysis of genomic architecture in the region of genomic rearrangement suggests that tracts of microhomology could facilitate TMPRSS2/ERG fusion events.
16823619	The impact of genomic alterations on the transcriptome: a prostate cancer cell line case study.	"Genetic instability may lead to the loss/gain of transcriptional control. Here we investigated the effect of genomic instability, that is loss/gain of chromosomal regions on the global transcriptome of prostate cancer cell line DU145. The genomic loss/gain map obtained through BAC array-based CGH was superimposed on the dynamic transcriptome of DU145 cells treated with serum for 0 h (serum starved), 2 h and 12 h. The genomic analysis suggested that in DU145 cells: (1) chromosomal gains are prominent than losses and (2) copy number changes are associated with chromosome-specific and dynamic gene expression regulatory mechanisms. A significant proportion of the genes in the stable regions of the chromosome were up-regulated whereas a higher proportion of genes were down-regulated at 2 and 12 h in the deleted regions of the chromosomes following serum treatment. No change in expression was observed for the genes in the gained regions over a period of time. This analysis led us to propose that loss of heterozygosity leads to an overall transcriptional down-regulation that may further lead to a decrease in the expression of putative tumor suppressors. The genomic profile of DU145 is similar to pathological specimens of prostate cancer, hence the genomic/transcriptomic signature of DU145 can be used to understand the pathology of prostate cancer. It is expected that this analysis will allow a better understanding of transcriptional regulatory mechanisms in the context of genomic loss and gain and may lead to the discovery of novel oncogenes and tumor suppressors and the underlying regulatory pathways."
16831166	Assessment of aberrations on chromosome 8 in prostatic atrophy.	"OBJECTIVE: To systematically examine the genetic alterations on chromosome 8 in prostate epithelia deriving from atrophic areas, and to compare these alterations with those of cells derived from prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia (PIN) and prostate cancer in the same organ. MATERIAL AND METHODS: Tissue microarrays were constructed from 50 patients with histologically different tissues, including normal, PIN, atrophy and cancer lesions. Control samples were obtained from 10 patients who died from causes other than prostate cancer. Multicolour DNA probes for 8p22, centromere 8 and 8q24 were used to detect genetic alterations by fluorescence in situ hybridisation analysis. RESULTS: Chromosomal alterations were detected on chromosome 8 in all analysed tissues. Including all observed signal patterns, a gradual increase of nuclei with loss of 8p22 was detected in normal (16%), in atrophy (21%), in PIN (25%) and in cancer tissue (31%), and there was gain in 8q24 in normal tissue (10%), in atrophy lesions (19%), in PIN (21%) and in cancer (27%). Generally, in all three lesion types the percentage of cells with 8q24 gain was significantly lower than the percentage of cells with loss of 8p22. CONCLUSION: This investigation confirms the presence of severe chromosomal aberrations in the epithelium of the atrophic glands of the prostate. The aberrations are the same those that can be found in PIN and in prostate cancer. These findings confirm the genetic instability of the cells in the atrophic areas of the prostate, which can be a target for further injuries, leading to prostate cancer."
16833202	[Current situation of researches on the molecule mechanism of hormone refractory prostate cancer]	"Most cases of prostate cancer become hormone refractory after 12 to 18 months of androgen deprivation therapy. The etiology of the disease is thought to be multifactorial, associated with genetic, dietary, and environmental factors. The article reviews the current situation of researches at home and abroad on the molecule mechanism of hormone refractory. It expounds the influence of the androgen receptor and its genetic mutation, apoptosis and the gene changes of p53, p21, EphB2 on prostate cancer. It is hoped to be of some directive value for the studies of prostate cancer."
16883603	"1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 transcriptionally represses p45Skp2 expression via the Sp1 sites in human prostate cancer cells."	"Upregulation of p27Kip1 protein in 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3-treated cancer cells is mediated via enhancement of gene transcription and reduction of protein degradation. 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 inhibits the expression of p45Skp2, the F-box protein which is implicated in p27Kip1 degradation, to reduce turnover of p27Kip1 protein. In this study, we elucidate the underlying mechanism by which 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 inhibits p45Skp2 in human LNCaP prostate cancer cells. Western blot and RT-PCR analysis suggest that 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 suppresses p45Skp2 via transcriptional repression. Promoter activity assays indicate that 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 directly inhibits p45Skp2 promoter activity. Deletion analysis shows that 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 response element is localized at -447/-291 bp region from the translational start site of the p45Skp2 promoter. Mutation analysis suggests that two Sp1 sites localized at -386/-380 and -309/-294 bp region are required for transcriptional repression. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (CHIP) assay demonstrates that VDR indirectly binds to these Sp1 sites in vivo and this binding is increased after 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 treatment. Re-CHIP assay suggests that VDR and Sp1 form a complex to bind to the Sp1 sites. DNA affinity precipitation assay (DAPA) shows that histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) is recruited to the Sp1 sites after 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 stimulation. Re-CHIP assay verifies that binding of Sp1 and HDAC1 to p45Skp2 promoter is enhanced after 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 treatment. HDAC inhibitor trichostatin A (TSA) reverses the inhibition of p45Skp2 promoter activity by 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3. Collectively, our results suggest that 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 induces the formation of VDR/Sp1 complex and acts via a Sp1- and HDAC1-depedent pathway to inhibit p45Skp2 transcription."
16889804	Human sensitivity to PhIP: a novel marker for prostate cancer risk.	"2-Amino-1-methyl-6-phenylimidazo[4,5-b]pyridine (PhIP) has been implicated in the development of colon, prostate and mammary gland tumors in rats. In this study, we developed a modified in vitro mutagen sensitivity assay, with activated PhIP (N-OH-PhIP) as the challenge mutagen and chromosome aberrations as the endpoint, and applied it in a pilot prostate cancer case-control study of 81 cases and 84 age and ethnicity-matched controls. Our results showed significantly higher baseline breaks among the cases, mean+/-S.E.=1.86+/-0.23 versus 0.96+/-0.14 in controls; P=0.006. Individuals with high baseline breaks (dichotomized at the control median) had a 36% increased risk for PC (OR=1.36; 95% CI=1.08-1.72). In stratified analysis, high baseline breaks was associated in younger participants (< or = 60 years) with an OR of 1.71 (1.14-2.57) and in those with a positive family history of PC, an OR of 1.43 (0.97-2.11). PhIP treatment induced significantly higher breaks in cases, mean+/-S.E.=5.07+/-0.39 versus 3.83+/-0.24 in controls; P=0.05. Higher PhIP-induced breaks was associated with an overall 17% increased risk for PC (OR=1.17; 95% CI=1.03-1.33), a significantly increased risks (OR=1.19; 95% CI=1.00-1.41) among younger participants, non-smokers (OR=1.39, 1.03-1.88) and 1.20 (1.00-1.45) among those with no family history of PC. Results from this pilot study demonstrate differential sensitivity to PhIP among subgroups and therefore, this assay have potential as a susceptibility marker for prostate cancer risk."
16912182	Tyrosine kinase Etk/BMX is up-regulated in human prostate cancer and its overexpression induces prostate intraepithelial neoplasia in mouse.	"The nonreceptor tyrosine kinase Etk/BMX was originally identified from the human prostate xenograft CWR22. Here, we report that Etk is up-regulated in human prostate tumor specimens surveyed. Knocking down Etk expression by a specific small interfering RNA (siRNA) in prostate cancer cells attenuates cell proliferation, suggesting an essential role of Etk for prostate cancer cell survival and growth. Targeted expression of Etk in mouse prostate epithelium results in pathologic changes resembling human prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia, indicating that up-regulation of Etk may contribute to prostate cancer development. A marked increase of luminal epithelial cell proliferation was observed in the Etk transgenic prostate, which may be attributed in part to the elevated activity of Akt and signal transducers and activators of transcription 3 (STAT3). More interestingly, the expression level of acetyltransferase cyclic AMP-responsive element binding protein-binding protein (CBP) is also increased in the Etk transgenic prostate as well as in a prostate cancer cell line overexpressing Etk, concomitant with elevated histone 3 acetylation at lysine 18 (H3K18Ac). Down-modulation of Etk expression by a specific siRNA leads to a decrease of H3 acetylation in prostate cancer cell lines. Our data suggest that Etk may also modulate chromatin remodeling by regulating the activity of acetyltransferases, such as CBP. Given that Etk may exert its effects in prostate through modulation of multiple signaling pathways altered in human prostate cancer, the Etk transgenic mouse model may be a useful tool for studying the functions of Etk and identification of new molecular markers and drug targets relevant to human diseases."
16924473	Elevated microsatellite alterations at selected tetranucleotides (EMAST) and mismatch repair gene expression in prostate cancer.	"Elevated microsatellite alterations at selected tetranucleotides (EMAST), a new form of microsatellite instability (MSI) affecting tetranucleotide repeats, was recently described to be frequent in several tumor types (e.g., bladder, lung, ovarian, and skin cancers). EMAST was found as a form of microsatellite alteration distinct from the MSI phenotype in hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC)-related tumors which mostly affects mono- and dinucleotide repeats. To date, no study has investigated the role of EMAST in prostate cancer. We therefore analyzed 81 prostate tumors using 10 markers frequently detecting EMAST in other cancer types and the National Cancer Institute-consensus panel for HNPCC detection plus BAT40. In addition, we investigated p53 gene alterations [loss of heterozygosity (LOH)] and the expression of p53 and the mismatch repair (MMR) genes hMLH1 and hMSH2 on tissue microarrays. EMAST was detected in 4/81 (5%) cases and MSI in 6/79 (7.6%) cases. LOH of p53 was found in 9/45 (20%) informative cases. There was no correlation between MSI status and the histopathological or molecular characteristics of the tumors. Immunohistochemistry revealed p53 positivity in 5/61 (8%) tumors. There was a significant correlation between tumors showing a recurrence within 3 years after treatment and p53 positivity (p=0.029). Reduced hMLH1 expression, but no complete loss, was detected in 9/41 (22%) tumors without any correlations to histopathological or clinical features. Analysis of hMSH2 expression was available from 58/81 (72%) tumors. Staining intensity was as follows: negative in 7/58 (12%), weak staining in 16/58 (27.5%) samples, moderate staining in 19/58 (33%) samples, and strong staining in 16/58 (27.5%) samples. When negative/weak staining and moderate/strong staining were considered as two groups, there was a significant association between hMSH2 expression and tumor recurrence (p=0.039). In conclusion, our data show that MSI and EMAST are infrequent but distinct patterns of MSI in prostate tumors not related to MMR defects, p53 alterations, and histopathological characteristics. p53 positivity and moderate to strong hMSH2 expression of prostate tumors are correlated with early disease recurrence and indicate an unfavorable clinical course of the disease. These two genes could be useful biomarkers for the prediction of patients' outcome and should be analyzed in prospective studies."
16951139	TMPRSS2:ERG fusion-associated deletions provide insight into the heterogeneity of prostate cancer.	"Prostate cancer is a common and clinically heterogeneous disease with marked variability in progression. The recent identification of gene fusions of the 5'-untranslated region of TMPRSS2 (21q22.3) with the ETS transcription factor family members, either ERG (21q22.2), ETV1 (7p21.2), or ETV4 (17q21), suggests a mechanism for overexpression of the ETS genes in the majority of prostate cancers. In the current study using fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH), we identified the TMPRSS2:ERG rearrangements in 49.2% of 118 primary prostate cancers and 41.2% of 18 hormone-naive lymph node metastases. The FISH assay detected intronic deletions between ERG and TMPRSS2 resulting in TMPRSS2:ERG fusion in 60.3% (35 of 58) of the primary TMPRSS2:ERG prostate cancers and 42.9% (3 of 7) of the TMPRSS2:ERG hormone-naive lymph node metastases. A significant association was observed between TMPRSS2:ERG rearranged tumors through deletions and higher tumor stage and the presence of metastatic disease involving pelvic lymph nodes. Using 100K oligonucleotide single nucleotide polymorphism arrays, a homogeneous deletion site between ERG and TMPRSS2 on chromosome 21q22.2-3 was identified with two distinct subclasses distinguished by the start point of the deletion at either 38.765 or 38.911 Mb. This study confirms that TMPRSS2:ERG is fused in approximately half of the prostate cancers through deletion of genomic DNA between ERG and TMPRSS2. The deletion as cause of TMPRSS2:ERG fusion is associated with clinical features for prostate cancer progression compared with tumors that lack the TMPRSS2:ERG rearrangement."
16983328	Bioinformatics approach leads to the discovery of the TMPRSS2:ETS gene fusion in prostate cancer.	"Recurrent chromosomal rearrangements have not been well characterized in common carcinomas. We describe the use of a novel bioinformatics approach to discover candidate oncogenic chromosomal aberrations on the basis of outlier gene expression called COPA (cancer outlier profile analysis). We demonstrate how this approach led to the identification of gene fusions of the 5'-untranslated region of TMPRSS2 (21q22.3), an androgen regulated gene, with the ETS transcription factor family members, either ERG (21q22.2), ETV1 (7p21.2), or ETV4(17q21). These novel gene fusions suggest a mechanism for overexpression of the ETS genes in the majority of prostate cancers identified through PSA screening. Considering the high incidence of prostate cancer and the high frequency of this gene fusion, the TMPRSS2-ETS gene fusions are the most common genetic aberration so far described in human malignancies. The clinical implications of this discovery are significant for diagnosis and potentially for the development of targeted therapy."
17073757	The androgen receptor DNA-binding domain determines androgen selectivity of transcriptional response.	"The AR (androgen receptor) is a hormone-dependent transcription factor that translates circulating androgen hormone levels into a physiological cellular response by directly regulating the expression of its target genes. It is the key molecule in e.g. the development and maintenance of the male sexual characteristics, spermatocyte production and prostate gland development and growth. It is also a major factor in the onset and maintenance of prostate cancer and a first target for pharmaceutical action against the further proliferation of prostate cancer cells. The AR is a member of the steroid hormone receptors, a group of steroid-inducible transcription factors sharing an identical consensus DNA-binding motif. The problem of how specificity in gene activation is achieved among the different members of this nuclear receptor subfamily is still unclear. In this report, we describe our investigations on how the AR can specifically activate its target genes, while the other steroid hormone receptors do not, despite having the same consensus monomeric DNA-binding motif. In this respect, we describe how the AR interacts with a newly identified class of steroid-response elements to which only the AR and not, for example, the glucocorticoid receptor can bind."
17108105	"Decreased NKX3.1 protein expression in focal prostatic atrophy, prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia, and adenocarcinoma: association with gleason score and chromosome 8p deletion."	"NKX3.1 is a homeobox gene located at chromosome 8p21.2, and one copy is frequently deleted in prostate carcinoma. Prior studies of NKX3.1 mRNA and protein in human prostate cancer and prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia (PIN) have been conflicting, and expression in focal prostate atrophy lesions has not been investigated. Immunohistochemical staining for NKX3.1 on human tissue microarrays was decreased in most focal atrophy and PIN lesions. In carcinoma, staining was inversely correlated with Gleason grade. Fluorescence in situ hybridization showed that no cases of atrophy had loss or gain of 8p, 8 centromere, or 8q24 (C-MYC) and only 12% of high-grade PIN lesions harbored loss of 8p. By contrast, NKX3.1 staining in carcinoma was correlated with 8p loss and allelic loss was inversely related to Gleason pattern. Quantitative reverse transcription-PCR for NKX3.1 mRNA using microdissected atrophy revealed a concordance with protein in five of seven cases. In carcinoma, mRNA levels were decreased in 6 of 12 cases but mRNA levels correlated with protein levels in only 4 of 12 cases, indicating translational or post-translational control. In summary, NKX3.1 protein is reduced in focal atrophy and PIN but is not related to 8p allelic loss in these lesions. Therefore, whereas genetic disruption of NKX3.1 in mice leads to PIN, nongenetic mechanisms reduce NKX3.1 protein levels early in human prostate carcinogenesis, which may facilitate both proliferation and DNA damage in atrophic and PIN cells. Monoallelic deletions on chromosome 8p are associated with more advanced invasive and aggressive disease."
17108215	Comparison of genetic alterations detected in circulating microsatellite DNA in blood plasma samples of patients with prostate cancer and benign prostatic hyperplasia.	"Prostate cancer is the most frequent malignant disease and the second most frequent cause of death due to cancer in men in the Western world. Since serum prostate-specific antigen (PSA) and its subforms show poor specificity in clinical practice, a molecular marker for the detection and discrimination of prostate cancer (PCa) could be of great interest. To investigate the potential significance of genetic aberrations, such as loss of heterozygosity (LOH), in PCa we identified and characterized allelic losses in circulating tumor-associated DNA in blood from patients with localized PCa. Genomic DNA extracted from cell-free plasma of blood samples drawn from 65 PCa patients was analyzed using a panel of 15 polymorphic microsatellite markers mapping to known tumor-suppressor genes. Comparative analyses were performed with a control group of 36 patients with benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH). In the current study, we demonstrate that PCa patients had higher DNA concentrations in their blood circulation than BPH patients. In the marker panel studied, LOH was more frequently detected in PCa patients (34%) than in BPH patients (22%). The incidence of LOH in the plasma DNA of PCa patients was highest at chromosomal regions 3p24 (THRB, 22%) and 8p21 (D8S360, 22%) in comparison to the BPH control cohort, which frequently showed LOH at loci 8q21, 8p21, 9p21, and 11q22 (D8S286, D8S360, D9S1748, and D11S898, each 6%). These results indicate that microsatellite analysis using plasma DNA may be an interesting tool for molecular screening of PCa patients."
17125911	KLF6 IVS1 -27G>A variant and the risk of prostate cancer in Finland.	"OBJECTIVES: A recent report demonstrated that KLF6 IVS1 -27G>A substitution increases the transcription of alternatively spliced isoforms; this action was suggested to be associated with prostate cancer (pCA). To evaluate these findings among the Finnish population, a total of 3348 samples were analysed. METHODS: The variant was genotyped in 164 patients with familial pCA, 852 patients with unselected pCA, 459 patients with benign prostate hyperplasia (BPH), 923 male population controls, and 950 men from a Finnish prostate-specific antigen (PSA) screening trial with PSA levels less than 1.0ng/ml. Odds ratios (ORs) and corresponding 95% confidence intervals (95%CIs) were calculated by using logistic regression to estimate pCA risk. RESULTS: Association testing revealed no significant differences between familial prostate cancer patients and population controls (OR: 0.84; 95%CI, 0.56-1.28; p=0.42), unselected cases and controls (OR: 0.95; 95%CI, 0.76-1.19; p=0.63), or BPH cases and controls (OR: 1.12; 95%CI, 0.86-1.46; p=0.39). pCA and BPH cases were also compared with PSA-screened controls. None of these analyses revealed any significant associations. CONCLUSIONS: Our results do not support the suggested association of KLF6 IVS1 -27G>A germline polymorphism with pCA risk and also suggest that the variant is not a risk allele for BPH in the Finnish population."
17143515	"Cellular expression, localization and interactions of the product of the human MOST-1 gene associated with breast and prostate cancers."	"We previously isolated and characterized the novel human gene MOST-1 (C8orf17) that is ubiquitously expressed in all cancer cell lines tested but differentially expressed in normal adult tissues. MOST-1 maps to chromosome region 8q24.2 whose amplification is frequently associated with breast and prostate cancers. RT-PCR analyses of breast and prostatic biopsies revealed MOST-1 overexpression and/or amplification in high-grade carcinomas. We raised and characterized a polyclonal antibody against a MOST-1-specific synthetic peptide. in vitro expression of MOST-1 protein revealed a tendency to exist as high molecular mass isoforms which are SDS-insoluble upon thermal stress. MOST-1 displayed cytoplasmic localization in four human cell lines (hTERT-HME1 normal mammary epithelial, MCF7 breast adenocarcinoma, PrEC normal prostate epithelial and DU145 prostate carcinoma), with polar expression during cell division. Knockdown of MOST-1 expression in DU145 cells resulted in reduced cell proliferation but enhanced apoptosis implying a putative mitogenic role of MOST-1. Yeast two-hybrid analyses demonstrated interaction with seven human proteins, most of which are overexpressed in tumors or involved in metabolic pathways. The interacting proteins were creatine kinase, Gardner feline sarcoma v-FGR oncogene product, telethonin, SNC73 protein, ferritin light chain, peripheral benzodiazepine receptor, and immunoglobulin C (mu) and C (delta) heavy chain. Co-immunoprecipitation assays validated the interactions of MOST-1 with the latter three proteins. Our results suggest that MOST-1 is associated with cell survival, proliferation and progression of cancer cells."
17192874	"BCAR1 expression in prostate cancer: association with 16q23 LOH status, tumor progression and EGFR/KAI1 staining."	"BACKGROUND: The 16q23 locus has been recently suggested in both breast and prostate cancer to contain a gene involved in disease progression. The breast cancer antiestrogen resistance 1 (BCAR1) gene, located at 16q23, contributes to many cellular processes including migration and survival, and interacts in vitro with the growth factor receptor EGFR and the metastasis suppressor KAI1. METHODS: BCAR1, EGFR, and KAI1 expression was studied by immunohistochemistry on a tissue microarray containing 100 localized prostate cancers (LPC), 15 hormone refractory prostate cancers (HRPC), and 15 lymph node metastasis (LNM). Forty eight of the LPC were also analyzed for 16q23 LOH status using microsatellite markers. RESULTS: BCAR1 staining was present in 25% of LPC, associated with higher Gleason score, and in 60% and 80% of, respectively, LNM and HRPC. BCAR1 expression was inversely correlated with 16q23 LOH status (P < 0.001), and was associated with high EGFR staining (P < 0.02), and negative KAI1 expression (P < 0.01). CONCLUSIONS: BCAR1 expression in LPC seems to be regulated at least in part by genetic events. The increased expression of BCAR1 with disease progression suggests a potential interest for both prognosis and treatment."
17205532	Detection of tumor-specific DNA in blood and bone marrow plasma from patients with prostate cancer.	"Tumor tissues, blood plasma and bone marrow (BM) aspirates of 57 prostate cancer patients (PCa) without clinical signs of overt metastases were assessed for LOH (loss of heterozygosity) by a PCR-based fluorescence microsatellite analysis, using a panel of 15 markers. Additionally, micrometastatic tumor cells in BM were monitored by an immunocytological cytokeratin assay. In total, 25 (44%), 32 (56%) and 41 (72%) of the patients had at least 1 LOH in their blood, BM and tumor samples, respectively. Among the informative cases, the frequency of LOH was highest in blood plasma for the markers D8S360 (18%) and D10S1765 (15%), and in BM plasma for THRB (24%) and D8S137 (22%). Comparison of blood plasma and BM with tumors showed discrepant results in 35% and 45% of patients, respectively. Whereas all LOHs at THRB in BM plasma were also detected in the autologous tumor tissues, LOHs at D6S474 and D11S898 in BM were not retrieved in the tumors. The comparison with established risk factors showed a correlation of borderline significance for LOH at D9S1748 in the BM aspirates (p=0.055) and a significant correlation in the tumor samples (p=0.004) with increasing pathologic Gleason scores. Interestingly, 22% of the PCa patients harbored tumor cells in their BM and tended (p=0.065) to have more frequent LOH (16%) in BM plasma compared to patients without tumor cells (9%). These data demonstrate, for the first time, the presence of free tumor-specific DNA in blood and BM of PCa patients and suggest a possible relationship to BM micrometastasis."
17219200	MYH mutations are rare in prostate cancer.	"PURPOSE: Oxidative stress is considered a risk factor for prostate cancer development and is associated with the production of reactive oxygen species (ROS). The base excision repair gene MYH protects against ROS-mediated damage to DNA. Inherited MYH mutations predispose to colorectal adenomas and cancer. A compromised base-excision repair function due to defective MYH may contribute to prostate carcinogenesis. Here, we examine the genetic contribution of MYH to prostate cancer risk. METHODS: Patients diagnosed with high-grade prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia (HGPIN) alone (n = 45), prostate cancer alone (n = 123) or both (n = 82) were screened for the two most common mutations in the MYH gene using PCR-based RFLP analysis. A single patient with an inherited MYH mutation as well as a subset of 26 patients presenting with a family history of colorectal cancer were screened for additional MYH mutations by direct sequencing of the entire coding region. RESULTS: Biallelic germline mutations in MYH were not detected among prostate cancer patients. Only a single patient was a heterozygous carrier for the Y165C missense mutation. Allelic deletion or somatic mutation of the remaining MYH allele was not identified in this patient's tumor DNA. Two patients harbored V22M polymorphism and three patients were carriers of Q324H polymorphism. CONCLUSIONS: MYH mutations are unlikely to contribute to prostate cancer risk."
17219381	Gain of chromosome X in prostatic atrophy detected by CGH and FISH analyses.	"BACKGROUND: Focal atrophy is presumed to be an indirect forerunner of prostate cancer. The aim of this study was to examine genetic alterations in prostate epithelia deriving from atrophic areas and compare these findings with those of cells deriving from paired prostate cancer in the same patient. METHODS: Formalin fixed paraffin wax-embedded prostatectomy specimens from 20 prostate cancer patients were utilized in this study. Comparative Genomic Hybridization (CGH) was performed on atrophic areas. To validate the CGH results, Fluorescence in Situ Hybridization (FISH) analysis was performed on atrophic areas and paired cancer tissue. RESULTS: Gain of the whole chromosome X was found as sole aberration in seven (70%) atrophic tissues by CGH. A gain of centromere X was observed in 13 (68.4%) atrophic areas and in 18 (90%) cancer tissues using FISH. CONCLUSIONS: Our investigation reconfirms the genetical instability of cells of the atrophic acini and attention of relevance of gain of chromosome X in atrophic areas."
17233803	Clinically localised prostate cancer is microsatellite stable.	"OBJECTIVES: To determine the frequency of microsatellite instability (MSI) change with mono-, di- and tetranucleotide markers in clinically localized prostate cancer, and to correlate those markers with clinical and pathological variables. MATERIALS AND METHODS: Two forms of MSI have been described in human cancer: MSI typical of hereditary nonpolyposis colon cancer, defined with mono- and dinucleotide repeat MS; and a second variety of MSI is best seen at selective tetranucleotide repeats, i.e. elevated microsatellite alterations at select tetranucleotides (EMAST). Prostate specimens were taken from 50 patients. The MS analysis used the Bethesda consensus panel (BCP) and four tetranucleotide loci shown to detect the presence of EMAST. RESULTS: All but four tumours were stable for the 14 loci investigated. There were two (4%) cases with adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) instability among the BCP markers and the same instability rate (4%) amongst the EMAST markers. These four tumours were all unstable at one locus of the 10 markers of the BCP that classified them as MS stable. CONCLUSIONS: The MSI related to a mismatch repair deficiency or to the EMAST does not seem to be important in prostate cancer in the early stages of the disease."
17242703	"Mutation analysis of aryl hydrocarbon receptor interacting protein (AIP) gene in colorectal, breast, and prostate cancers."	"Germline mutations in the aryl hydrocarbon receptor interacting protein (AIP) gene were recently identified in individuals with pituitary adenoma predisposition (PAP). These patients have prolactin (PRL) or growth hormone (GH) oversecreting pituitary adenomas, the latter exhibiting acromegaly or gigantism. Loss-of-heterozygosity (LOH) analysis revealed that AIP is lost in PAP tumours, suggesting that it acts as a tumour-suppressor gene. Aryl hydrocarbon receptor interacting protein is involved in several pathways, but it is best characterised as a cytoplasmic partner of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR). To examine the possible role of AIP in the genesis of common cancers, we performed somatic mutation screening in a series of 373 colorectal cancers (CRCs), 82 breast cancers, and 44 prostate tumour samples. A missense R16H (47G>A) change was identified in two CRC samples, as well as in the respective normal tissues, but was absent in 209 healthy controls. The remaining findings were silent, previously unreported, changes of the coding, non-coding, or untranslated regions of AIP. These results suggest that somatic AIP mutations are not common in CRC, breast, and prostate cancers."
17268171	Correlating breakage-fusion-bridge events with the overall chromosomal instability and in vitro karyotype evolution in prostate cancer.	"Chromosomal instability (CIN) is thought to underlie the generation of chromosomal changes and genomic heterogeneity during prostatic tumorigenesis. The breakage-fusion-bridge (BFB) cycle is one of the CIN mechanisms responsible for characteristic mitotic abnormalities and the occurrence of specific classes of genomic rearrangements. However, there is little detailed information concerning the role of BFB and CIN in generating genomic diversity in prostate cancer. In this study we have used molecular cytogenetic methods and array comparative genomic hybridization analysis (aCGH) of DU145, PC3, LNCaP, 1532T and 1542T to investigate the in vitro role of BFB as a CIN mechanism in karyotype evolution. Analysis of mitotic structures in all five prostate cancer cell lines showed increased frequency of anaphase bridges and nuclear strings. Structurally rearranged dicentric chromosomes were observed in all of the investigated cell lines, and Spectral Karyotyping (SKY) analysis was used to identify the participating rearranged chromosomes. Multicolor banding (mBAND) and aCGH analysis of some of the more complex chromosomal rearrangements and associated amplicons identified inverted duplications, most frequently involving chromosome 8. Chromosomal breakpoint analysis showed there was a higher frequency of rearrangement at centromeric and pericentromeric genomic regions. The distribution of inverted duplications and ladder-like amplifications was mapped by mBAND and by aCGH. Adjacent spacing of focal amplifications and microdeletions were observed, and focal amplification of centromeric and end sequences was present, particularly in the most unstable line DU145. SKY analysis of this line identified chromosome segments fusing with multiple recipient chromosomes (jumping translocations) identifying potential dicentric sources. Telomere free end analysis indicated loss of DNA sequence. Moreover, the cell lines with the shortest telomeres had the most complex karyotypes, suggesting that despite the expression of telomerase, the reduced telomere length could be driving the observed BFB events and elevated levels of CIN in these lines."
17274947	The FBXW7 beta-form is suppressed in human glioma cells.	"FBXW7 (F-box and WD40 domain protein 7) is an F-box protein with 7 tandem WDs (tryptophan-aspartic acid) that functions as a phosphoepitope-specific substrate recognition component of SCF (Skp1-Cul1-F-box protein) ubiquitin ligases and catalyzes the ubiquitination of proteins promoting cell proliferation, such as CCNE1, MYC, AURKA, NOTCH1, and JUN, which are frequently activated in a wide range of human cancers. FBXW7 is a candidate tumor suppressor, and mutations have been reported in some human tumors. In this study, we analyzed 84 human tumor cell lines in search for genetic alterations of FBXW7, as well as mRNA and protein expressional changes, and compared them with expression levels of the CCNE1, MYC, and AURKA proteins. We found a novel nonsense mutation in a colon cancer cell line SCC and confirmed the missense mutations in SKOV3, an ovarian cancer cell line, and LoVo, a colon cancer cell line. Moreover, suppressed expression of FBXW7 accompanied by activation of the target proteins were observed in ovarian, colon, endometrial, gastric, and prostate cancers. It is notable that highly suppressed mRNA expression of the FBXW7 beta-form was found in all the human glioma cell lines analyzed; enhanced expressions of CCNE1, MYC, and AURKA were observed in these cells. Our present results imply that FBXW7 plays a pivotal role in many tissues by controlling the amount of cell cycle promoter proteins and that dysfunction of this protein is one of the essential steps in carcinogenesis in multiple organs."
17289875	Germline mutations in the BRCA2 gene and susceptibility to hereditary prostate cancer.	"PURPOSE: Several epidemiologic studies have reported that carriers of germline mutations in the BRCA2 gene have an increased risk of prostate cancer, with the highest risk observed in men diagnosed at earlier ages. However, studies of the contribution of BRCA2 mutations to the etiology of hereditary prostate cancer (HPC) have been inconsistent. EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: To further address this issue, 266 subjects from 194 HPC families participating in the Seattle-based Prostate Cancer Genetic Research Study were screened for BRCA2 mutations by sequencing the coding regions, intron-exon boundaries, and suspected regulatory elements of this gene. Of selected HPC families, 32 had multiple breast or ovarian cancer cases, 16 were Jewish, 8 had a pancreatic cancer case, and 138 had at least one affected man diagnosed with prostate cancer at an early age (<60 years). RESULTS: No disease-associated protein truncating BRCA2 mutations were found in 266 subjects from HPC families. There were 61 DNA sequence variants, of which 31 (50.8%) changed the predicted amino acids. No associations were found between these missense changes and family characteristics. Among affected men with prostate cancer, there were no statistically significant differences between the genotype frequencies of DNA variants with a minor allele frequency of 1% or higher and between the strata defined by median age at diagnosis or by clinical features. CONCLUSION: No evidence was found in this study for an association between BRCA2 mutations and susceptibility to HPC in men selected from high-risk families."
17295237	Aneuploidy of chromosome Y in prostate tumors and seminal vesicles: a possible sign of aging rather than an indicator of carcinogenesis?	"Chromosome Y aneuploidies have been reported as one of the recurrent cytogenetic findings in prostate cancer (PCa) and many other solid and hematological tumors. We have studied this aneuploidy in 28 patients with PCa undergoing radical prostatectomy, one patient with benign hyperplasia (BPH) and four organ donors. A total of 72 samples have been studied: 17 tumors, 25 nontumor prostate tissues, 1 BPH, 21 seminal vesicles samples obtained along with the prostate when patients underwent radical prostatectomy and prostate tissues and seminal vesicles from four organ donors. We have also studied the aneuploidy of chromosome Y in peripheral blood from four of the patients and in seminal vesicles of 11 individuals with bladder cancer (BC). The study has been performed by Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) in uncultured cells. Our results indicate that complete loss of chromosome Y is found in almost all the seminal vesicles both from patients with PCa and patients with BC (samples obtained from the tissue bank), and is more frequent in prostate tumors than in nontumor samples. The percentages of chromosome Y loss in the tissues analyzed are significatively higher than expected in lymphocytes considering the patient's age as reported in the literature. The high percentage of chromosome Y loss found in the nonmalignant seminal vesicles of these patients may be an indicator of an ageing process rather than a primary cytogenetic alteration in the carcinogenesis of the prostate. However, a contribution of this loss to chromosomal instability and therefore, to the multistep tumorigenic process, cannot be discarded."
17332283	"Haplotypes, loss of heterozygosity, and expression levels of glycine N-methyltransferase in prostate cancer."	"PURPOSE: Glycine N-methyltransferase (GNMT) affects genetic stability by regulating DNA methylation and interacting with environmental carcinogens. In a previous study, we showed that GNMT acts as a susceptibility gene for hepatocellular carcinoma. Here, we report on our efforts to characterize the haplotypes, loss of heterozygosity (LOH), and expression levels of the GNMT in prostate cancer. EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Peripheral blood mononuclear cell DNA collected from 326 prostate cancer patients and 327 age-matched controls was used to determine GNMT haplotypes. Luciferase reporter constructs were used to compare the promoter activity of different GNMT haplotypes. GNMT LOH rates in tumorous specimens were investigated via a comparison with peripheral blood mononuclear cell genotypes. Immunohistochemical staining was used to analyze GNMT expression in tissue specimens collected from 5 normal individuals, 33 benign prostatic hyperplasia patients, and 45 prostate cancer patients. RESULTS: Three major GNMT haplotypes were identified in 92% of the participants: A, 16GAs/DEL/C (58%); B, 10GAs/INS/C (19.9%); and C, 10GAs/INS/T (14.5%). Haplotype C carriers had significantly lower risk for prostate cancer compared with individuals with haplotype A (odds ratio, 0.68; 95% confidence interval, 0.48-0.95). Results from a phenotypic analysis showed that haplotype C exhibited the highest promoter activity (P < 0.05, ANOVA test). In addition, 36.4% (8 of 22) of the prostatic tumor tissues had LOH of the GNMT gene. Immunohistochemical staining results showed abundant GNMT expression in normal prostatic and benign prostatic hyperplasia tissues, whereas it was diminished in 82.2% (37 of 45) of the prostate cancer tissues. CONCLUSIONS: Our findings suggest that GNMT is a tumor susceptibility gene for prostate cancer."
17334343	Comprehensive assessment of TMPRSS2 and ETS family gene aberrations in clinically localized prostate cancer.	"Novel recurrent gene fusions between the androgen-regulated gene TMPRSS2 and the ETS family members ERG, ETV1, or ETV4 have been recently identified as a common molecular event in prostate cancer development. We comprehensively analyzed the frequency and risk of disease progression for the TMPRSS2 and ETS family genes rearrangements in a cohort of 96 American men surgically treated for clinically localized prostate cancer. Using three break apart (TMPRSS2, ERG, ETV4) and one fusion (TMPRSS:ETV1) fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) assays, we identified rearrangements in TMPRSS2, ERG, ETV1, and ETV4 in 65, 55, 2, and 2% of cases, respectively. Overall, 54 and 2% of cases demonstrated TMPRSS2:ERG and TMPRSS2:ETV1 fusions, respectively. As intronic loss of genomic DNA between TMPRSS2 and ERG has been identified as a mechanism of TMPRSS2:ERG fusion, our assays allowed us to detect deletion of the 3' end of TMPRSS2 and the 5' end of ERG in 41 and 39% of cases rearranged for respective genes. Prostate cancers demonstrating TMPRSS2 gene rearrangement were associated with high pathologic stage (P=0.04). Our results confirm that recurrent chromosomal aberrations in TMPRSS2 and/or ETS family members are found in about 70% of prostate cancers. Importantly, we define a novel approach to study these gene fusions and identified cases where TMPRSS2 was rearranged without rearrangement of ERG, ETV1 or ETV4 and cases with ETS family gene rearrangement without TMPRSS2 rearrangement, suggesting that novel 5' and 3' partners may be involved in gene fusions in prostate cancer."
17363566	Inactivation of Apc in the mouse prostate causes prostate carcinoma.	"Alterations of the Wnt/beta-catenin signaling pathway are positively associated with the development and progression of human cancer, including carcinoma of the prostate. To determine the role of activated Wnt/beta-catenin signaling in mouse prostate carcinogenesis, we created a mouse prostate tumor model using probasin-Cre-mediated deletion of Apc. Prostate tumors induced by the deletion of Apc have elevated levels of beta-catenin protein and are highly proliferative. Tumor formation is fully penetrant and follows a consistent pattern of progression. Hyperplasia is observed as early as 4.5 weeks of age, and adenocarcinoma is observed by 7 months. Continued tumor growth usually necessitated sacrifice between 12 and 15 months of age. Despite the high proliferation rate, we have not observed metastasis of these tumors to the lymph nodes or other organs. Surgical castration of 6-week-old mice inhibited tumor formation, and castration of mice with more advanced tumors resulted in the partial regression of specific prostate glands. However, significant areas of carcinoma remained 2 months postcastration, suggesting that tumors induced by Apc loss of function are capable of growth under conditions of androgen depletion. We conclude that the prostate-specific deletion of Apc and the increased expression of beta-catenin associated with prostate carcinoma suggests a role for beta-catenin in prostate cancer and offers an appropriate animal model to investigate the interaction of Wnt signaling with other genetic and epigenetic signals in prostate carcinogenesis."
17373720	Preferential chemosensitization of PTEN-mutated prostate cells by silencing the Akt kinase.	"BACKGROUND: In prostate cancer, mutations of the phosphatase PTEN can activate the kinase cascade PI3K/Akt/mTOR which induces drug resistance. METHODS: Chemosensitization by siRNA targeting Akt was studied in HEK293 cells forced to express CA-Akt or kinase-dead DN-Akt. To decrease drug resistance, Akt was silenced with siRNA in human prostate DU-145 cell line expressing the normal PTEN or in LNCaP and PC3 cell lines expressing mutated-PTEN. Taxol was used for the chemosensitization studies. RESULTS: Silencing Akt in the drug-resistant CA-Akt cells efficiently sensitized cells to antitubule agents, whereas silencing drug-responsive DN-Akt cells did not. Only minor effects were obtained in wild-type HEK293 cells. Potentiation by siRNA of taxol cytotoxicity was significantly greater in mutated-PTEN cells than in prostate cells expressing wild-type PTEN. The apoptotic program induced by taxol was preferentially potentiated by Akt siRNA in PTEN-mutated cell lines as regards the DU-145 cell line. CONCLUSIONS: Silencing Akt in PTEN-mutated prostate cancer cells enhances the antitumor effects of taxol. No siRNA chemosensitization was obtained in prostate cells with wild type PTEN."
17487399	VEGF transcription and mRNA stability are altered by WT1 not DDS(R384W) expression in LNCaP cells.	"To identify physiologically relevant WT1 transcriptional target genes in prostate cancer cells, we have established stably transfected LNCaP cell lines expressing either WT1(A), its mutant counterpart DDS(R384W), or vector control. Microarray analyses of these cells revealed that vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) was differentially expressed in the engineered lines. Regulation of VEGF by WT1 likely contributes to kidney angiogenesis during development and WT1 mutants such as DDS(R384W) are associated with the Denys-Drash syndrome (DDS), characterized by renal abnormalities. Recent mechanistic studies have demonstrated that the WT1(A) isoform binds VEGF promoter sequences and transcriptionally regulates VEGF reporter constructs. However, regulation of VEGF is complex, involving both transcriptional and post-transcriptional processes. This study examined the ability of hormone and Actinomycin D treatment to alter VEGF mRNA levels in stably transfected WT-LNCaP, DDS-LNCaP, or V-LNCaP prostate cancer cells. The rationale of this study was based on a previous finding that enhancement of VEGF expression in DDS-LNCaP cells occurred only in the presence of the androgen analog, R1881. One possible explanation for these results was that DDS-WT1 stabilized VEGF mRNA so that it accumulated to higher levels. This hypothesis was tested by treating engineered LNCaP cells with Actinomycin D (Act D) and then measuring VEGF mRNA levels by quantitative real-time PCR. The combined effects of WT1 or DDS(R384W) and hormone were tested in these message stability assays and also in transcription assays of transiently transfected LNCaP cells. The results indicated that DDS-WT1 is unable to regulate VEGF transcription or stabilize VEGF mRNA in LNCaP prostate cancer cells. However our observations are also consistent with wild-type WT1(A) having both transcriptional and post-transcriptional effects on VEGF mRNA levels in the presence of hormone. These studies of VEGF regulation by WT1 and dysregulation by DDS(R384W) suggest an important role for WT1 in both normal and tumor-related angiogenesis."
17511731	BRCA2 mutation screening is clinically relevant in breast and early prostate cancer families.	"It is known that in some families an association exists between breast and prostate cancer. Several reports have suggested that BRCA2 mutations may be associated with an increased risk of these cancers. Herein, we report three cases of early onset of prostate cancer in families with female and male breast cancers. In each case, the familial phenotype is associated with a mutation of the BRCA2 gene. More generally, genetic counseling, including screening for BRCA2 mutations, should become standard practice in kindred with prostate and breast cancers."
17523142	Scanning copy number and gene expression on the 18q21-qter chromosomal region by the systematic multiplex PCR and reverse transcription-PCR methods.	"We examined differences in copy number and expression of 127 genes located on the 18q21-qter chromosomal region of the breast and prostate cancer cell lines, using the systematic multiplex PCR and reverse transcription-PCR (SM PCR and SM RT-PCR) methods that we developed. Semi-quantitative data were obtained that were comparable in quality, but not in quantity, to data from DNA microarray hybridization analysis. In the chromosomal region where losses are frequent in breast, prostate, and other cancers, we detected a homozygous deletion of the SMAD4 gene in the MDA-MB-468 breast cancer cell line. We also observed partial or entire loss of expression in genes such as CCBE1, CCDC11, CD226, NP_115536.1, NP_689683.2, RNF152, SERPINB8, and TCF4 in certain breast and/or prostate cancer cell lines. An increase in gene expression was rare, but found with the transcription factor ONECUT2 gene in all of the cancer cell lines examined. Real-time qRT-PCR experiments confirmed these SM RT-PCR results. Further analysis of clinical specimens of breast cancer by real-time qRT-PCR demonstrated that the gene expression of CCBE1, TCF4, NP_115536.1, and NP_689683.2 was downregulated in the majority of clinical cases of breast cancer."
17548809	Monotherapy with a tumor-targeting mutant of Salmonella typhimurium cures orthotopic metastatic mouse models of human prostate cancer.	"Bacterial infection occasionally has a marked therapeutic effect on malignancies, as noted as early as the 19th century. Recently, there have been attempts to develop cancer treatment by using tumor-targeting bacteria. These treatments were developed to deliver therapeutic molecules specifically to tumors. Researchers used anaerobic microorganisms that preferentially grew in necrotic tumor areas. However, the resulting tumor killing was, at best, limited. We have developed a far more effective bacterial cancer therapy by targeting viable tumor tissue by using Salmonella typhimurium leu-arg auxotrophs. Although these bacteria grow in viable as well as necrotic areas of tumors, the nutritional auxo trophy severely restricts growth in normal tissue. In the current study, we measured the antitumor efficacy of the S. typhimurium A1-R mutant, which is auxotrophic for leu-arg and has increased antitumor virulence selected by tumor passage. A1-R was used to treat metastatic PC-3 human prostate tumors that had been orthotopically implanted in nude mice. GFP was used to image tumor and metastatic growth. Of the 10 mice with the PC-3 tumors that were injected weekly with S. typhimurium A1-R, 7 were alive and well at the time the last untreated mouse died. Four A1-R-treated mice remain alive and well 6 months after implantation. Ten additional nontumor-bearing mice were injected weekly to determine the toxicity of S. typhimurium A1-R. No toxic effects were observed. The approach described here, where bacterial monotherapy effectively treats metastatic prostate tumors, is a significant improvement over previous bacterial tumor-therapy strategies that require combination with toxic chemotherapy."
17550130	Molecular genetics of prostate cancer: clinical translational opportunities.	"Prostate cancer (PC) development reflects a complex sequence of biologic and molecular events. Several inheritable and somatic genetic changes have been identified. The knowledge of the molecular basis of PC can improve our understanding of the causes of this common cancer and provide information on prognosis and treatment. To date, however, no molecular studies have yet yielded consistent information that is ready to be incorporated into clinical practice. We reviewed the current literature on the molecular biology of prostate cancer and analyzed different potential tumor markers according to the classical concepts of oncogenes, suppressor genes, and the more modern concepts of genes involved in detoxification or inflammatory pathways of cancer progression. This review aims to identify trends in PC research and suggests potential clinical applications for diagnosis, prognosis, prevention and treatment."
17551147	"Analysis of integrin alpha7 mutations in prostate cancer, liver cancer, glioblastoma multiforme, and leiomyosarcoma."	"BACKGROUND: Integrins are the major adhesive molecules in mammalian cells. Each integrin subtype plays a unique role in cell differentiation and embryo development. However, integrin involvement in carcinogenesis has not been well defined. METHODS: We identified mutations in integrin alpha7 by sequencing genomic DNAs and cDNAs from 122 specimens, including 62 primary human tumor samples, four cell lines, and 56 matched normal tissues. We evaluated the tumor suppressor activity of integrin alpha7 with colony formation, soft agar colony growth, and cell migration assays by forcing its expression in PC-3 and Du145 prostate cancer cells and SK-UT-1 leiomyosarcoma cells. PC-3 and Du145 xenograft tumors with increased levels of integrin alpha7 in severe combined immune deficient mice were used to assess the effect of integrin alpha7 on tumor growth and metastasis. Immunostaining was used to localize and to measure the level of integrin alpha7 in 701 and 141 specimens of prostate and smooth muscle, respectively. A meta-analysis of integrin alpha7 mRNA microarray data from four studies was performed. Kaplan-Meier analyses were used to assess survival. All statistical tests were two-sided. RESULTS: Integrin alpha7 mutations that generate truncations were found in specimens of 16 of 28 prostate cancers (57%, 95% confidence interval [CI] = 37% to 76%), five of 24 hepatocellular carcinomas (21%, 95% CI = 7% to 42%), five of six glioblastomas multiforme (83%, 95% CI = 36% to 99%), and one of four leiomyosarcomas (25%, 95% CI = 0.6% to 81%). Integrin alpha7 mutations were associated with increased recurrence of human prostate cancer (nine recurrences among 13 patients with integrin alpha7 mutations versus one among eight without such mutations; odds ratio [OR] = 14, 95% CI = 1.15 to 782, P = .024) and hepatocellular carcinoma (five recurrences among eight patients with integrin alpha7 mutations versus one among 16 without such mutations, OR = 21, 95% CI = 1.6 to 1245; P = .007). Forced expression of normal integrin alpha7 in prostate cancer and leiomyosarcoma cell lines suppressed tumor growth and metastasis both in vitro and in vivo. Focal or no integrin alpha7 expression in human prostate cancer and soft tissue leiomyosarcoma was associated with a reduction of metastasis-free survival (for example, for prostate cancer with focal or no expression, 5-year metastasis-free survival was 32%, 95% CI = 24.4% to 40.3%, and for prostate cancer with at least weak expression, it was 85%, 95% CI = 79% to 91%; P<.001). Microarray analysis indicated that cyclin D kinase inhibitor 3 and GTPase-activating protein may be possible targets for integrin alpha7-mediated tumor suppressor activity and inhibition of cell motility. CONCLUSION: Integrin alpha7 appears to be a tumor suppressor that operates by suppressing tumor growth and retarding migration."
17565157	Prostate cancer progression and survival in BRCA2 mutation carriers.	"BACKGROUND: Mutations in the BRCA2 gene are associated with an increased risk of prostate cancer, but it is not known whether they are associated with progression of the disease. We compared prostate cancer-specific survival, disease stage, and tumor grade between prostate cancer patients carrying the Icelandic BRCA2 999del5 founder mutation and noncarriers. METHODS: Using population-based registries, we identified all 596 prostate cancer patients who were diagnosed in Iceland during 1955 through 2004 among 29603 male relatives of unselected breast cancer probands. BRCA2 mutation status could be determined for 527 patients (88.4%). Stage and grade were abstracted from original records, blindly with respect to mutation status, for a subgroup of 89 patients that included all mutation carriers and, for each carrier, two control patients without the BRCA2 999del5 mutation who were matched to the carrier on years of diagnosis and birth. Hazard ratios (HRs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) for prostate cancer-specific survival were estimated using multivariable regression models. All statistical tests were two-sided. RESULTS: The mutation was carried by 30 patients (5.7%). Compared with noncarriers, BRCA2 999del5 mutation carriers had a lower mean age at diagnosis (69.0 years versus 74.0 years; P = .002), more advanced tumor stage (stages 3 or 4, 79.3% versus 38.6%; P < .001), higher tumor grade (grades G3-4, 84.0% versus 52.7%, P = .007), and shorter median survival time (2.1 years, 95% CI = 1.4 to 3.6 years, versus 12.4 years, 95% CI = 9.9 to 19.7 years). Carrying the BRCA2 999del5 mutation was also associated with an increased risk of dying from prostate cancer (adjusting for year of diagnosis and birth, HR = 3.42, 95% CI = 2.12 to 5.51); the association remained after adjustment for stage and grade (HR = 2.35, 95% CI = 1.08 to 5.11). The prognosis of BRCA2 999del5 mutation carriers was not associated with period of diagnosis or with relatedness to breast cancer probands. CONCLUSIONS: The Icelandic BRCA2 999del5 founder mutation was strongly associated with rapidly progressing lethal prostate cancer."
17566103	Suppression of androgen receptor-mediated gene expression by a sequence-specific DNA-binding polyamide.	"Androgen receptor (AR) is essential for the growth and progression of prostate cancer in both hormone-sensitive and hormone-refractory disease. A DNA-binding polyamide that targets the consensus androgen response element binds the prostate-specific antigen (PSA) promoter androgen response element, inhibits androgen-induced expression of PSA and several other AR-regulated genes in cultured prostate cancer cells, and reduces AR occupancy at the PSA promoter and enhancer. Down-regulation of PSA by this polyamide was comparable to that produced by the synthetic antiandrogen bicalutamide (Casodex) at the same concentration. Genome-wide expression analysis reveals that a similar number of transcripts are affected by treatment with the polyamide and with bicalutamide. Direct inhibition of the AR-DNA interface by sequence-specific DNA binding small molecules could offer an alternative approach to antagonizing AR activity."
17607361	Modulation of prostate cancer genetic risk by omega-3 and omega-6 fatty acids.	"Although a causal role of genetic alterations in human cancer is well established, it is still unclear whether dietary fat can modulate cancer risk in a predisposed population. Epidemiological studies suggest that diets rich in omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids reduce cancer incidence. To determine the influence of fatty acids on prostate cancer risk in animals with a defined genetic lesion, we used prostate-specific Pten-knockout mice, an immune-competent, orthotopic prostate cancer model, and diets with defined polyunsaturated fatty acid levels. We found that omega-3 fatty acids reduced prostate tumor growth, slowed histopathological progression, and increased survival, whereas omega-6 fatty acids had opposite effects. Introducing an omega-3 desaturase, which converts omega-6 to omega-3 fatty acids, into the Pten-knockout mice reduced tumor growth similarly to the omega-3 diet. Tumors from mice on the omega-3 diet had lower proportions of phosphorylated Bad and higher apoptotic indexes compared with those from mice on omega-6 diet. Knockdown of Bad eliminated omega-3-induced cell death, and introduction of exogenous Bad restored the sensitivity to omega-3 fatty acids. Our data suggest that modulation of prostate cancer development by polyunsaturated fatty acids is mediated in part through Bad-dependent apoptosis. This study highlights the importance of gene-diet interactions in prostate cancer."
17632455	Gene fusions between TMPRSS2 and ETS family genes in prostate cancer: frequency and transcript variant analysis by RT-PCR and FISH on paraffin-embedded tissues.	"Recurrent gene fusions between TMPRSS2 and ETS family genes have recently been shown to occur at a high frequency in prostate cancer. In this study, we used formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissue and evaluated both TMPRSS2-ERG and TMPRSS2-ETV1 fusions by reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH). The results were correlated to overexpression of the downstream ERG and ETV1 sequences. Of 82 cases examined, TMPRSS2-ETV1 fusion was seen in only one case, by FISH. In comparison, TMPRSS2-ERG fusion was documented in 35 cases (43%) by either RT-PCR or FISH. Deletion, rather than translocation, was found to be the main mechanism for TMPRSS2-ERG gene fusion (81 vs 19%). RT-PCR and FISH results correlated well, with most positive cases resulting in overexpression of downstream ERG sequences. Several TMPRSS2-ERG fusion transcript variants were identified, most of which are predicted to encode truncated ERG proteins. Prostate cancer of Gleason's scores 6 or 7 had more frequent TMPRSS2-ERG fusions than higher-grade tumors, but this difference was not statistically significant (P=0.42). On the other hand, mucin-positive carcinomas more often harbor such gene fusions when compared to mucin-negative tumors (P=0.004). These morphological correlates, and more importantly the potential correlation of such fusions to clinical outcome and treatment responses, should be further explored."
17636258	Activation of targeted necrosis by a p53 peptide: a novel death pathway that circumvents apoptotic resistance.	"Cancer cells escape apoptosis by intrinsic or acquired mechanisms of drug resistance. An alternative strategy to circumvent resistance to apoptosis could be through redirection into other death pathways, such as necrosis. However, necrosis is a nonspecific, nontargeted process resulting in cell lysis and inflammation of both cancer and normal cells and is therefore not a viable alternative. Here, we report that a C-terminal peptide of p53, called p53p-Ant, induced targeted necrosis only in multiple mutant p53 human prostate cancer lines and not normal cells, because the mechanism of cytotoxicity by p53p-Ant is dependent on the presence of high levels of mutant p53. Topotecan- and paclitaxel-resistant prostate cancer lines were as sensitive to p53p-Ant-induced targeted necrosis as parental lines. A massive loss of ATP pools and intracellular generation of reactive oxygen species was involved in the mechanism of targeted necrosis, which was inhibited by O(2)(.) scavengers. We hypothesize that targeted necrosis by p53p-Ant is dependent on mutant p53, is mediated by O(2)(.) loss and ATP, and can circumvent chemotherapy resistance to apoptosis. Targeted necrosis, as an alternative pathway for selective killing of cancer cells, may overcome the problems of nonspecificity in utilizing the necrotic pathway."
17671502	Distinct classes of chromosomal rearrangements create oncogenic ETS gene fusions in prostate cancer.	"Recently, we identified recurrent gene fusions involving the 5' untranslated region of the androgen-regulated gene TMPRSS2 and the ETS (E26 transformation-specific) family genes ERG, ETV1 or ETV4 in most prostate cancers. Whereas TMPRSS2-ERG fusions are predominant, fewer TMPRSS2-ETV1 cases have been identified than expected on the basis of the frequency of high (outlier) expression of ETV1 (refs 3-13). Here we explore the mechanism of ETV1 outlier expression in human prostate tumours and prostate cancer cell lines. We identified previously unknown 5' fusion partners in prostate tumours with ETV1 outlier expression, including untranslated regions from a prostate-specific androgen-induced gene (SLC45A3) and an endogenous retroviral element (HERV-K_22q11.23), a prostate-specific androgen-repressed gene (C15orf21), and a strongly expressed housekeeping gene (HNRPA2B1). To study aberrant activation of ETV1, we identified two prostate cancer cell lines, LNCaP and MDA-PCa 2B, that had ETV1 outlier expression. Through distinct mechanisms, the entire ETV1 locus (7p21) is rearranged to a 1.5-megabase prostate-specific region at 14q13.3-14q21.1 in both LNCaP cells (cryptic insertion) and MDA-PCa 2B cells (balanced translocation). Because the common factor of these rearrangements is aberrant ETV1 overexpression, we recapitulated this event in vitro and in vivo, demonstrating that ETV1 overexpression in benign prostate cells and in the mouse prostate confers neoplastic phenotypes. Identification of distinct classes of ETS gene rearrangements demonstrates that dormant oncogenes can be activated in prostate cancer by juxtaposition to tissue-specific or ubiquitously active genomic loci. Subversion of active genomic regulatory elements may serve as a more generalized mechanism for carcinoma development. Furthermore, the identification of androgen-repressed and insensitive 5' fusion partners may have implications for the anti-androgen treatment of advanced prostate cancer."
17671638	Stem cells in prostate cancer initiation and progression.	Peter Nowell and David Hungerford's discovery of the Philadelphia chromosome facilitated many critical studies that have led to a paradigm shift in our understanding of cancer as a disease of stem cells. This Review focuses on the application of these concepts to investigation of the role of stem cells in prostate cancer initiation and progression. Major strides in the development of in vitro and in vivo assays have enabled identification and characterization of prostate stem cells as well as functional evaluation of the tumorigenic effects of prostate cancer-related genetic alterations.
17671680	Malignant transformation of human benign prostate epithelial cells by high linear energy transfer alpha-particles.	"Although epidemiological studies have suggested a positive correlation between environmental radon exposure and prostate cancer, the mechanism involved is not clear. In the present study, we examined the oncogenic transforming potency of alpha-particles using non-tumorigenic, telomerase-immortalized human benign prostate epithelial cells. We report the malignant transformation of human benign prostate epithelial cells after a single exposure to 0.6 Gy dose of alpha-particles. Transformed cells showed anchorage-independent growth in soft agar and induced progressively growing tumors when transplanted into SCID mice. The tumors were characterized histologically as poorly differentiated adenocarcinomas. The cell line derived from tumor (SCID 5015), like the unirradiated cells, expressed cytokeratin 5, 8 and 18, NKX3.1 and AMACR. The malignant cells showed increased secretion of MMP2. Stepwise chromosomal changes in the progression to tumorigenicity were observed. Chromosome abnormalities were identified in both irradiated and tumorigenic cells relative to the non-irradiated control cells. Prominent changes in chromosomes 6, 11 and 16, as well as mutations and deletions of the p53 gene were observed in the tumor outgrowth and tumor cells. These findings provide the first evidence of malignant transformation of human benign prostate epithelial cells exposed to a single dose of alpha-particles. This model provides an opportunity to study the cellular and molecular alterations that occur in radiation carcinogenesis in human prostate cells."
17683063	Identification of patients with low-risk for aneuploidy: comparative discriminatory models using linear and machine-learning classifiers in prostate cancer.	"BACKGROUND: Prostate needle biopsy (PNB) ploidy status has proven utility to predict adverse outcomes after prostatectomy. We sought to develop models to predict ploidy status using clinicopathologic variables. METHODS: We identified a cohort of 169 patients with a diagnosis of prostatic adenocarcinoma on PNB, and estimated ploidy status (determined using Feulgen stained biopsy tissue) using four predictors, including age, prebiopsy PSA, highest Gleason score (GS), and the percentage of involvement by carcinoma at the biopsy site with the highest GS (PCARBX). Logistic regression (LR), Neural Network (NN), and CART classifiers were constructed. RESULTS: Univariate analyses revealed all four predictors to be significantly associated with ploidy status. On multivariable analyses, LR identified a 2-parameter model, including GS and PCARBX that had a significant ability to predict ploidy status with a 74% and 75% correct classification rate (CCR), respectively. Using the same variables, CART and NN yielded similar CCRs of 70.4%. Within GS = 6 cohort, the CART model classified over 90% of biopsies as diploid when patients had a PCARBX < 55% and a log(PSA) < 1.7. CONCLUSIONS: Our study demonstrates that models using GS and PCARBX are able to predict PNB ploidy status with acceptable accuracy. While machine learning classifier-derived models yield similar accuracy as LR-derived models, the latter methodology has the distinct advantage of being applicable in future datasets to estimate case-specific predictions. This information may be useful in identifying potentially aneuploid patients, who can then be targeted for more aggressive therapy."
17700570	Rare germline mutations in the BRCA2 gene are associated with early-onset prostate cancer.	"Studies of families who segregate BRCA2 mutations have found that men who carry disease-associated mutations have an increased risk of prostate cancer, particularly early-onset disease. A study of sporadic prostate cancer in the UK reported a prevalence of 2.3% for protein-truncating BRCA2 mutations among patients diagnosed at ages < or =55 years, highlighting the potential importance of this gene in prostate cancer susceptibility. To examine the role of protein-truncating BRCA2 mutations in relation to early-onset prostate cancer in a US population, 290 population-based patients from King County, Washington, diagnosed at ages <55 years were screened for germline BRCA2 mutations. The coding regions, intron-exon boundaries, and potential regulatory elements of the BRCA2 gene were sequenced. Two distinct protein-truncating BRCA2 mutations were identified in exon 11 in two patients. Both cases were Caucasian, yielding a mutation prevalence of 0.78% (95% confidence interval (95%CI) 0.09-2.81%) and a relative risk (RR) of 7.8 (95%CI 1.8-9.4) for early-onset prostate cancer in white men carrying a protein-truncating BRCA2 mutation. Results suggest that protein-truncating BRCA2 mutations confer an elevated RR of early-onset prostate cancer. However, we estimate that <1% of early-onset prostate cancers in the general US Caucasian population can be attributed to these rare disease-associated BRCA2 mutations."
17701929	Role of PTEN gene in progression of prostate cancer.	"INTRODUCTION: The aim of this study was to clarify the role of PTEN gene in progression of prostate cancer. MATERIALS AND METHODS: A total of 51 formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded specimens of prostate cancer were analyzed for PTEN mutations. Tissue microdissection and polymerase chain reaction/single-strand conformation polymorphism methods were used. Clinical and pathologic data of the patients were reviewed with regard to PTEN mutation. RESULTS: The Gleason score (GS) was less than 7 in 29 (56.8%), 7 in 11 (21.6%), and greater than 7 in 11 (21.6%). Tumor stage was IIa, IIb, IIc, and IV in 14 (27.4%), 4 (7.8%), 21 (41.2%), and 12 (23.6%) patients, respectively. Eleven of 12 stage IV tumors had metastases at the time of presentation. Six of 51 cases (11.6%) showed mutation in PTEN which had involved exones 1, 2, and 5. Two of these cases had localized and the others had advanced prostate cancer. One case of the tumors with PTEN mutation had a GS of 7 and 5 had GSs greater than 7. Patients with a positive mutation of PTEN had a significantly greater GS (P < .001), lower survival rate (P = .001), higher tendency to metastasis (P = .002), and higher prostate-specific antigen (P = .03). Cox proportional hazard model showed that only GS was significantly correlated with mortality (P = .03). CONCLUSION: Patients with prostate cancer who had PTEN mutation had also a significantly greater GS, poorer prognosis, and higher rate of metastasis. However, this mutation cannot predict the prognosis and the GS is a more precise factor."
17704736	Molecular profiling and genomic microarrays in prostate cancer.	"In the present review article a global approach regarding the usefulness of genomic microarrays in prostate cancer management, is attempted. Cancer is a multistep process of mutations in key regulatory genes and epigenetic alterations that result in loss of balanced gene expression. A complete knowledge of the interaction between the genetic variability of the neoformation (tumor profiling) and the genetic variability of the host (inherited genome profiling), will be able to determine the better strategy against the cancer and the less toxicity for the patient. Alterations in the sequence of the hormone binding domain of the androgen receptor as well as mutations in some genes, determine radioresistance and resistance or sensitivity to some chemotherapeutic drugs. New therapies using monoclonal antibodies directed against specific extracellular binding domains of some receptors are based on molecular alterations observed in tumors."
17804708	Heterogeneity of TMPRSS2 gene rearrangements in multifocal prostate adenocarcinoma: molecular evidence for an independent group of diseases.	"Recurrent gene fusions between the androgen-regulated gene TMPRSS2 and the ETS family transcription factors ERG, ETV1, and ETV4 have been identified in the majority of prostate adenocarcinomas (PCA). PCA is often multifocal with histologic heterogeneity of different tumor foci. As TMPRSS2 is a common 5' partner of ETS gene fusions, we monitored TMPRSS2 rearrangement by fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) to study the origin and molecular basis of multifocal PCA heterogeneity. TMPRSS2 rearrangement was evaluated by FISH on a tissue microarray representing 93 multifocal PCAs from 43 radical prostatectomy resections. Overall, 70% (30 of 43) of the cases showed TMPRSS2 rearrangement, including 63% through deletion (loss of the 3' TMPRSS2 signal), 27% through translocation (split of 5' and 3' TMPRSS2 signals), and 10% through both mechanisms in different tumor foci. Of the 30 TMPRSS2 rearranged cases, 30% showed concordance in all tumor foci, whereas 70% were discordant in at least one focus. In TMPRSS2 rearranged cases, the largest (index) tumor was rearranged 83% of the time. Pathologic stage, size, or Gleason grade of the multifocal PCA did not correlate with overall TMPRSS2 rearrangement. Our results suggest that multifocal PCA is a heterogeneous group of diseases arising from multiple, independent clonal expansions. Understanding this molecular heterogeneity is critical to the future development and utility of diagnostic and prognostic PCA biomarkers."
17827054	Etiologic impact of known cancer susceptibility genes.	"The impact of a gene variant on the population burden of cancer can be measured by the population attributable fraction (PAF), which depends on the risk conferred by the variant, genotype relative risk (GRR), the frequency of the variant in the population and the mode of inheritance. PAF defines the proportion of the disease in the study population due to a gene variant, hence the synonymic term, etiologic fraction. After a review of the literature, 27 confirmed cancer susceptibility genes, groups of genes and loci were selected for analysis on the basis of their prevalence and availability of validated GRR data. The covered variants represent the most common established cancer susceptibility genes; those not included have marginal PAFs on common cancers. The PAF due to known genes at the covered sites was highest for brain hemangioblastoma (19%), conferred by the VHL gene. For colorectal cancer, the PAF estimates amounted to 7.0%. Including genes and identified loci from whole genome scans, PAFs for both breast and prostate cancers summed up to 70%. The derived estimates should rectify common overstatements on the contribution of individual high penetrance genes on common cancers at the population level. More dramatically, the estimates show the large PAFs conferred by the recently discovered breast, prostate and colorectal cancer loci, most of which are not known to alter coding sequences or expression patterns and they thus act through yet unexplained mechanisms. Although of low risk, these common variants appear to explain large proportions of breast and prostate cancers in the population."
17868871	Functional analysis of the host defense peptide Human Beta Defensin-1: new insight into its potential role in cancer.	"Although it is known that innate immunity is key for protecting the body against foreign agents such as bacteria, little is known about elements of the innate immune system that have anti-tumor activity. Human Beta Defensin-1 (hBD-1), an important component of the innate immune response, is lost at high frequencies in malignant prostatic tissue, while high levels of expression are maintained in adjacent benign regions. In prostate carcinoma, frequent genetic alterations occur in the 8p22-23 region and several studies indicate there may be multiple tumor suppressor genes present within this region. The high incidence of loss of hBD-1 expression in prostate cancer, along with its chromosomal location of 8p23.2, raised the possibility that it may play a role in tumor suppression. To gain insight as to its function in prostate cancer, hBD-1 was cloned and ectopically expressed in four prostate cancer cell lines. Induction of hBD-1 expression resulted in a decrease in cellular growth in DU145 and PC3 cells. However, hBD-1 has no effect on the growth of androgen receptor (AR) positive LNCaP prostate cancer cells, but was again growth suppressive to PC3 cells with ectopic AR expression (PC3/AR+). hBD-1 also caused rapid induction of cytolysis and caspase-mediated apoptosis in DU145 and PC3 prostate cancer cells. Although the regulation of hBD-1 was not addressed in this study, our preliminary data demonstrated that the pathways involved may include cMYC and PAX2. Data presented here are the first to provide evidence of its potential role in prostate cancer cell death."
17875689	Genomic profiling reveals alternative genetic pathways of prostate tumorigenesis.	"Prostate cancer is clinically heterogeneous, ranging from indolent to lethal disease. Expression profiling previously defined three subtypes of prostate cancer, one (subtype-1) linked to clinically favorable behavior, and the others (subtypes-2 and -3) linked with a more aggressive form of the disease. To explore disease heterogeneity at the genomic level, we carried out array-based comparative genomic hybridization (array CGH) on 64 prostate tumor specimens, including 55 primary tumors and 9 pelvic lymph node metastases. Unsupervised cluster analysis of DNA copy number alterations (CNA) identified recurrent aberrations, including a 6q15-deletion group associated with subtype-1 gene expression patterns and decreased tumor recurrence. Supervised analysis further disclosed distinct patterns of CNA among gene-expression subtypes, where subtype-1 tumors exhibited characteristic deletions at 5q21 and 6q15, and subtype-2 cases harbored deletions at 8p21 (NKX3-1) and 21q22 (resulting in TMPRSS2-ERG fusion). Lymph node metastases, predominantly subtype-3, displayed overall higher frequencies of CNA, and in particular gains at 8q24 (MYC) and 16p13, and loss at 10q23 (PTEN) and 16q23. Our findings reveal that prostate cancers develop via a limited number of alternative preferred genetic pathways. The resultant molecular genetic subtypes provide a new framework for investigating prostate cancer biology and explain in part the clinical heterogeneity of the disease."
17881894	Androgen receptor modulation: lessons learned from beyond the prostate.	"Androgen receptor (AR) is an important transcription factor in prostatic diseases, such as prostate cancer and benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH). AR regulates the growth and survival of both benign and cancerous prostate epithelial cells. Therefore, modulation of AR function is an important means of treating prostatic diseases. Modern pharmacotherapy for these diseases includes, for example, medical castration and AR antagonists for prostate cancer and 5-alpha-reductase inhibitors for BPH. However, these treatments have limitations and are illustrated by AR reactivation after medical castration for prostate cancer, commonly termed castrate-resistant prostate cancer. A novel method of AR modulation has been demonstrated in spinal and bulbar muscular atrophy, a disease defined by a polyglutamine repeat expansion which leads to gain-of-function changes in AR and neuromuscular pathology. Here, we examine recent findings from the description of a compound that degrades AR and induces dissociation of AR from an AR coactivator. The biochemistry of this compound may have implications for prostate cancer."
17935910	The UGT2B17 gene deletion polymorphism and risk of prostate cancer. A case-control study in Caucasians.	"BACKGROUND: UDP-glucuronosyltransferase (UGT) 2B17 is a phase II metabolizing enzyme that mediates the glucuronidation of C(19) steroids. A deletion polymorphism in the UGT2B17 gene is associated with a substantial reduction in glucuronidation activity in vitro. METHODS: We examined the association between the UGT2B17 deletion polymorphism and the risk of incident prostate cancer in a population-based study from central Arkansas that included 411 Caucasian cases and 397 Caucasian controls. We developed a novel high-throughput procedure that uses real-time PCR and allelic discrimination for genotyping analysis. RESULTS: The prevalence of the UGT2B17 deletion [(0/0)] was 12% in the controls, which was consistent with previous population estimates and with Hardy Weinberg equilibrium. There was no association between the UGT2B17 deletion polymorphism and prostate cancer risk in unconditional logistic regression analysis. Compared to the wild-type group (+/+), the adjusted odds ratio (OR) was 0.89 (95% CI=0.55-1.45) for the homozygous deletion (0/0), and the OR was 0.99 (95% CI=0.73-1.35) for the heterozygote group (+/0). CONCLUSION: These findings show that the UGT2B17 deletion polymorphism is not associated with prostate cancer risk in Caucasians."
17991730	Wild-type but not mutant androgen receptor inhibits expression of the hTERT telomerase subunit: a novel role of AR mutation for prostate cancer development.	"Androgens play a central role in prostate development and prostate cancer proliferation. Induction of telomerase is an early event in prostate carcinogenesis and is considered as a marker for both primary tumors and metastases. Interestingly, several reports suggest that telomerase activity is regulated by androgens in vivo. Here, we show that the wild-type (WT) human androgen receptor (AR) inhibits the expression of the human telomerase reverse transcriptase (hTERT) and telomerase activity via inhibition of hTERT promoter activity in the presence of androgen receptor agonists. However, pure androgen antagonists failed to repress hTERT transcription. The androgen-mediated repression of hTERT is abrogated in a human prostate cancer cell line exhibiting hormone-dependent growth, which expresses a mutant AR (T877A) frequently occurring in prostate cancer. We reveal that this single amino acid exchange is sufficient for the lack of transrepression. Interestingly, chromatin immunoprecipitation data suggest that, in contrast to the WT AR, the mutant AR is recruited less efficiently to the hTERT promoter in vivo, indicating that loss of transrepression results from reduced chromatin recruitment. Thus, our findings suggest that the WT AR inhibits expression of hTERT, which is indicative of a protective mechanism, whereas the T877A mutation of AR not only broadens the ligand spectrum of the receptor but abrogates this inhibitory mechanism in prostate cancer cells. This novel role of AR mutations in prostate cancer development suggests the benefit to a search for new AR antagonists that inhibit transactivation but allow transrepression."
18006912	CYP17 genetic variation and risk of breast and prostate cancer from the National Cancer Institute Breast and Prostate Cancer Cohort Consortium (BPC3).	"CYP17 encodes cytochrome p450c17alpha, which mediates activities essential for the production of sex steroids. Common germ line variation in the CYP17 gene has been related to inconsistent results in breast and prostate cancer, with most studies focusing on the nonsynonymous single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) T27C (rs743572). We comprehensively characterized variation in CYP17 by direct sequencing of exons followed by dense genotyping across the 58 kb region around CYP17 in five racial/ethnic populations. Two blocks of strong linkage disequilibrium were identified and nine haplotype-tagging SNPs, including T27C, were chosen to predict common haplotypes (R(h)(2) >or= 0.85). These haplotype-tagging SNPs were genotyped in 8,138 prostate cancer cases and 9,033 controls, and 5,333 breast cancer cases and 7,069 controls from the Breast and Prostate Cancer Cohort Consortium. We observed borderline significant associations with prostate cancer for rs2486758 [TC versus TT, odds ratios (OR), 1.07; 95% confidence intervals (95% CI), 1.00-1.14; CC versus TT, OR, 1.09; 95% CI, 0.95-1.26; P trend=0.04] and rs6892 (AG versus AA, OR, 1.08; 95% CI, 1.00-1.15; GG versus AA, OR, 1.11; 95% CI, 0.95-1.30; P trend=0.03). We also observed marginally significant associations with breast cancer for rs4919687 (GA versus GG, OR, 1.04; 95% CI, 0.97-1.12, AA versus GG, OR, 1.17; 95% CI, 1.03-1.34; P trend=0.03) and rs4919682 (CT versus CC, OR, 1.04; 95% CI, 0.97-1.12; TT versus CC, OR, 1.16; 95% CI, 1.01-1.33; P trend=0.04). Common variation at CYP17 was not associated with circulating sex steroid hormones in men or postmenopausal women. Our findings do not support the hypothesis that common germ line variation in CYP17 makes a substantial contribution to postmenopausal breast or prostate cancer susceptibility."
18037956	Mechanisms of androgen receptor activation in advanced prostate cancer: differential co-activator recruitment and gene expression.	"Prostate tumour growth depends on androgens; hence treatment includes androgen ablation and anti-androgens. Eventually tumours progress and in approximately 30% of patients this is associated with mutation of the androgen receptor. Several receptor variants associated with advanced disease show promiscuous activation by other hormones and anti-androgens. Such loss of specificity could promote receptor activation, hence tumour growth, in the absence of conventional ligands, explaining therapy failure. We aimed to elucidate mechanisms by which alternative ligands promote receptor activation. The three most commonly identified variants in tumours (with amino-acid substitutions H874Y, T877A and T877S) and wild-type receptor showed differences in co-activator recruitment dependent upon ligand and the interaction motif utilized. Co-expression and knockdown of co-activators that bind via leucine or phenylalanine motifs, combined with chromatin immunoprecipitation and quantitative PCR, revealed these preferences extend to co-activator recruitment in vivo and affect receptor activity at the transcriptional level, with subsequent effects on target gene regulation. The findings suggest that mutant receptors, activated by alternative ligands, drive growth via different mechanisms to androgen-activated wild-type receptor. Tumours may hence behave differently dependent upon any androgen receptor mutation present and what ligand is driving growth, as distinct subsets of genes may be regulated."
18165275	Detection of TMPRSS2-ERG translocations in human prostate cancer by expression profiling using GeneChip Human Exon 1.0 ST arrays.	"Translocation of TMPRSS2 to the ERG gene, found in a high proportion of human prostate cancer, results in overexpression of the 3'-ERG sequences joined to the 5'-TMPRSS2 promoter. The studies presented here were designed to test the ability of expression analysis on GeneChip Human Exon 1.0 ST arrays to detect 5'-TMPRSS2-ERG-3' hybrid transcripts encoded by this translocation. Monitoring the relative expression of each ERG exon revealed altered transcription of the ERG gene in 15 of a series of 27 prostate cancer samples. In all cases, exons 4 to 11 exhibited enhanced expression compared with exons 2 and 3. This pattern of expression indicated that the most abundant hybrid transcripts involve fusions to ERG exon 4, and RT-PCR analyses confirmed the joining of TMPRSS2 exon 1 to ERG exon 4 in all 15 cases. The exon expression patterns also indicated that TMPRSS2-ERG fusion transcripts commonly contain deletion of ERG exon 8. Analysis of gene-level data from the arrays allowed the identification of genes whose expression levels significantly correlated with the presence of the translocation. These studies demonstrate that expression analyses using exon arrays represent a valuable approach for detecting ETS gene translocation in prostate cancer, in parallel with analyses of gene expression profiles."
18182994	Prostate cancer in male BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutation carriers has a more aggressive phenotype.	"There is a high and rising prevalence of prostate cancer (PRCA) within the male population of the United Kingdom. Although the relative risk of PRCA is higher in male BRCA2 and BRCA1 mutation carriers, the histological characteristics of this malignancy in these groups have not been clearly defined. We present the histopathological findings in the first UK series of BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutation carriers with PRCA. The archived histopathological tissue sections of 20 BRCA1/2 mutation carriers with PRCA were collected from histopathology laboratories in England, Ireland and Scotland. The cases were matched to a control group by age, stage and serum PSA level of PRCA cases diagnosed in the general population. Following histopathological evaluation and re-grading according to current conventional criteria, Gleason scores of PRCA developed by BRCA1/2 mutation carriers were identified to be significantly higher (Gleason scores 8, 9 or 10, P=0.012) than those in the control group. Since BRCA1/2 mutation carrier status is associated with more aggressive disease, it is a prognostic factor for PRCA outcome. Targeting screening to this population may detect disease at an earlier clinical stage which may therefore be beneficial."
18193092	Epidermal growth factor receptor activation in prostate cancer by three novel missense mutations.	"While epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) dysregulation is known to play a critical role in prostate carcinogenesis, there has been no direct evidence indicating EGFR mutations induce tumorigenesis in prostate cancer. We previously identified four novel EGFR somatic mutations in the EGFR tyrosine kinase domain of prostate cancer patients: G735S, G796S, E804G and R841K. In this study, we investigated the oncogenic potential of these somatic mutations by establishing stable clonal NIH3T3 cells expressing these four mutations and WT EGFR to determine their ability to increase cell proliferation and invasion. In the absence of the EGF ligand, cell proliferation was readily increased in G735S, G796S and E804G mutants compared to WT EGFR. The addition of EGF ligand greatly increased cell growth and transforming ability of these same EGFR mutants. Matrigel invasion assays showed enhanced invasion with G735S, G796S and E804G mutants. Western blot analysis showed that these EGFR mutations enhanced cell growth and invasion via constitutive and hyperactive tyrosine phosphorylation and led to the activation of mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK), signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3) and Akt pathways. Our findings demonstrate the oncogenic activation of three novel EGFR somatic missense mutations in prostate cancer. Molecules that regulate the mechanisms of their oncogenic activation represent novel targets for limiting tumor cell progression, and further elucidation of these mutations will have utility in prostate cancer treatment."
18202102	SnoRNA U50 is a candidate tumor-suppressor gene at 6q14.3 with a mutation associated with clinically significant prostate cancer.	"Deletion of chromosome 6q14-q22 is common in multiple human cancers including prostate cancer, and chromosome 6 transferred into cancer cells induces senescence and reduces cell growth, tumorigenicity and metastasis, indicating the existence of one or more tumor-suppressor genes in 6q. To identify the 6q tumor-suppressor gene, we first narrowed the common region of deletion to a 2.5 Mb interval at 6q14-15. Of the 11 genes located in this minimal deletion region and expressed in normal prostates, only snoRNA U50 was mutated, demonstrated transcriptional downregulation and inhibited colony formation in prostate cancer cells. The mutation, a homozygous 2 bp (TT) deletion, was found in two of 30 prostate cancer cell lines/xenografts and nine of 89 localized prostate cancers (eleven of 119 or 9% cancers). Two of 89 (2%) patients with prostate cancer also showed the same mutation in their germline DNA, but none of 104 cancer-free control men did. The homozygous deletion abolished U50 function in a colony formation assay. Analysis of 1371 prostate cancer cases and 1371 matched control men from a case-control study nested in a prospective cohort showed that, although a germline heterozygous genotype of the deletion was detected in both patients and controls at similar frequencies, the homozygosity of the deletion was significantly associated with clinically significant prostate cancer (odds ratio 2.9; 95% confidence interval 1.17-7.21). These findings establish snoRNA U50 as a reasonable candidate for the 6q tumor-suppressor gene in prostate cancer and likely in other types of cancers."
1823048	Value of nuclear DNA ploidy patterns in patients with prostate cancer after radical prostatectomy.	Flow cytometric analysis of DNA ploidy was performed on prostatic adenocarcinoma specimens from 80 patients. In all these patients a radical retropubic prostatectomy had been performed. The nuclei for DNA ploidy determination were extracted from paraffin-embedded material of whole sections of the prostate from patients treated by radical prostatectomy between 1980 and 1985. DNA ploidy was a strong prognostic indicator independent of tumor grade and tumor stage. DNA ploidy offered additional information on both tumor stage and tumor grade. In stage C disease the likelihood of progression-free survival was 89.5% in diploid tumors and 27.8% in aneuploid tumors after 9 years. In tetraploid tumors all patients progressed after 9 years. The computed survival rates in stage C disease showed that patients with diploid tumors did significantly better than those with aneuploid or tetraploid tumor patterns. These data indicate therefore that DNA ploidy patterns determined by flow cytometric analysis provide important additional prognostic information on prostatic adenocarcinoma treated by radical prostatectomy.
18247404	The UGT2B17 gene deletion is not associated with prostate cancer risk.	"BACKGROUND: Deletion polymorphism of the UDP-glucuronosyltransferase 2B17 (UGT2B17) gene has been associated with an increased prostate cancer risk in two previous independent studies. Here we determine the risk in a large-scale population-based case-control study. METHODS: Genotyping was conducted with a 5'-nuclease activity assay to distinguish those with one or two UGT2B17 gene copies (ins/del and ins/ins) from individuals homozygous for the deletion (del/del) allele. RESULTS: In contrast to previous findings, no association between the UGT2B17 deletion polymorphism and prostate cancer risk was found. Furthermore the UGT2B17 gene deletion did not affect the risk for prostate cancer specific death. CONCLUSION: The UGT2B17 deletion polymorphism does not play a major role in prostate cancer susceptibility as previously indicated."
18268330	Temporally controlled ablation of PTEN in adult mouse prostate epithelium generates a model of invasive prostatic adenocarcinoma.	"Studies of prostate cancer pathogenesis and development of new therapies have been hampered by a lack of appropriate mouse models. We have generated PSA-Cre-ER(T2) mice that express the tamoxifen-dependent Cre-ER(T2) recombinase selectively in prostatic epithelium, thus allowing us to target floxed genes selectively in epithelial cells of fully differentiated prostate of adult mice and to modulate the number of genetically altered cells. Our present mouse model, in which prostate carcinogenesis is initiated through Cre-ER(T2)-mediated somatic biallelic ablation of the tumor suppressor gene PTEN after puberty, closely mimics the course of human cancer formation. Indeed, mutant mice developed prostate epithelium hyperplasia within 4 weeks after PTEN ablation and prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia (PIN) in all lobes within 2-3 months, with the highest incidence in the dorsolateral lobe, which is considered to be the most similar to the peripheral zone of the human prostate, in which adenocarcinoma is preferentially localized. Eight to 10 months after PTEN ablation some PINs of the dorsolateral lobe had progressed to adenocarcinoma, but no distant metastases were found up to 20 months after PTEN ablation, indicating that progression to metastasis requires an additional mutation or mutations. Interestingly, monoallelic Cre-ER(T2)-mediated PTEN ablation in epithelial cells of adult prostate also generated focal hyperplasia and PINs, but exclusively in the dorsolateral lobe, and in much lower number and after a longer latency. However, no progression to adenocarcinoma was observed. Because PTEN expression was undetectable in epithelial cells from these PINs, loss of PTEN function appears to act as a permissive event for uncontrolled cell proliferation."
18270433	Novel missense mutation in the P-box of androgen receptor in a patient with androgen insensitivity syndrome.	"Mutations in the X-linked AR gene cause androgen insensitivity syndrome (AIS) by impairing androgen-dependent male sex differentiation to various degree. Here we describe a partial AIS patient with confliction with the assigned female sex. Although the patient was noticed to have ambiguous genitalia at birth, the patient was reared as a female with no medical intervention. At the age of 31 years, the patient visited us because the patient was dissatisfied with the assigned female sex. The patient was treated with systemic testosterone and topical dihydrotestosterone, but the external genitalia responded only minimally to the treatment. The genetic analysis revealed a novel missense K580R mutation in the P-box of the DNA-binding domain of androgen receptor, which was the first missense mutation shared by AIS and prostate cancer. Although the best predictor of the adult gender identity is documented to be the initial gender assignment in patients with partial AIS as well as those with complete AIS, deciding gender assignment for infants with partial AIS is still challenging."
18273831	The RNA-binding and adaptor protein Sam68 modulates signal-dependent splicing and transcriptional activity of the androgen receptor.	"The RNA-binding protein Sam68 has been reported to be up-regulated in clinical cases of prostate cancer (PCa), where it is thought to contribute to cell proliferation and survival. Consistent with this, we observed over-expression of Sam68 in a panel of clinical prostate tumours as compared with benign controls. Since Sam68 is implicated in a number of signalling pathways, we reasoned that its role in PCa may involve modulation of the androgen receptor (AR) signalling cascade, which drives the onset and progression of PCa. We found that Sam68 interacts with the AR in vivo in LNCaP cells, and is dynamically recruited to androgen response elements within the promoter region of the prostate-specific antigen (PSA) gene. Based on its known functions and nuclear location, Sam68 might either: (a) co-regulate AR-dependent transcription positively or negatively; or (b) modulate AR-dependent alternative splicing by enhancing incorporation of a Sam68-responsive exon transcribed under the control of an androgen-responsive promoter. We tested these possibilities using functional assays. Both wild-type Sam68 protein and the Sam68(V229F) mutant, which is impaired in RNA binding, functioned as a ligand-dependent AR co-activator on an androgen-regulated reporter gene. In contrast, splicing of a Sam68-responsive variable exon, transcribed under control of an androgen-responsive promoter, was strongly repressed in the presence of AR and androgens. This splicing inhibition was reversed by ectopic expression of Sam68 but enhanced by Sam68(V229F). These results demonstrate that Sam68 has separable effects on AR-regulated transcriptional activity and alternative splicing, both of which may affect PCa phenotypes."
18303116	SPAS-1 (stimulator of prostatic adenocarcinoma-specific T cells)/SH3GLB2: A prostate tumor antigen identified by CTLA-4 blockade.	"Discovery of immunologically relevant antigens in prostate cancer forms the basis for developing more potent active immunotherapy. We report here a strategy using the transgenic adenocarcinoma of mouse prostate (TRAMP) model, which allows for the functional identification of immunogenic prostate tumor antigens with relevance for human immunotherapy. Using a combination of active tumor vaccination in the presence of CTL-associated antigen 4 (CTLA-4) in vivo blockade, we elicited tumor-specific T cells used to expression clone the first T cell-defined TRAMP tumor antigen, called Spas-1 (stimulator of prostatic adenocarcinoma specific T cells-1). Spas-1 expression was increased in advanced primary TRAMP tumors. We show that the immunodominant SPAS-1 epitope SNC9-H(8) arose from a point mutation in one allele of the gene in TRAMP tumor cells, and that immunization with dendritic cells pulsed with SNC9-H(8) peptide resulted in protection against TRAMP-C2 tumor challenge. In humans, the Spas-1 ortholog SH3GLB2 has been reported to be overexpressed in prostate cancer metastases. Additionally, we identified a nonmutated HLA-A2-binding epitope in the human ortholog SH3GLB2, which primed T cells from healthy HLA-A2(+) individuals in vitro. Importantly, in vitro-primed T cells also recognized naturally processed and presented SH3GLB2. Our findings demonstrate that our in vivo CTLA-4 blockade-based T cell expression cloning can identify immunogenic cancer antigens with potential relevance for human immunotherapy."
18314628	[Mapping of a deletion interval on 8p21-22 in prostate cancer by gene dosage PCR]	"Various microsatellite and CGH studies in prostate cancer identify deletions on the short arm of chromosome 8 especially at band 8p21-22 searching for unknown putative tumor suppressor genes. By means of microsatellite markers several candidate genes were detected which may play different roles in early prostate cancer progression. We established a quantitative gene dosage PCR based on the real time PCR method serving the purpose of genomic fine mapping. Therefore we used 10 Assays-on Demand (ABI) for the detection of deletions located between and nearby the microsatellite markers D8S258 and NEFL spanning a genomic region of approximate 7 mbp. Comparative immunohistochemical analysis from tissue micro arrays (TMA) of 1122 independent cases followed. We were able to detect three clearly separated deletion intervals on 8p21-22. One on LZTS1, second on NEFL and third a deletion hot spot on LOXL2, which was affected in 72% of all investigated cases. Our comparative immunohistochemical TMA based studies demonstrate that LOXL2 is nearly lost in most prostate cancer tissues. LOXL2 catalyze the crosslinking of collagen and elastin in the extracellular matrix and it has been assumed that it is involved in tumor suppression and cell adhesion. LOXL2 is frequently expressed in proliferating tissues and shows a high expression in benign prostate tissue too. In prostate cancer the expression is positive correlated with the MIB1-score."
18336598	Microsatellite analysis of allelic imbalance in tumour and blood from patients with prostate cancer.	"OBJECTIVE: To investigate whether a high frequency of allelic imbalance (AI) is associated with clinicopathological variables of patients with prostate cancer. PATIENTS AND METHODS: We analysed loss of heterozygosity (LOH) and microsatellite (MS) instability (MSI) on circulating plasma DNA in a polymerase chain reaction (PCR)-based MS study of 230 patients with prostate cancer and 43 with benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) using a panel of 13 polymorphic MS markers. RESULTS: The overall incidence of AI was significantly higher in primary tumours (34%) than in blood plasma samples from patients with prostate cancer (11%). Although LOH (2.0%) and MSI (1.5%) were also found in BPH plasma samples, their frequencies were low. AI identified in plasma samples from patients with prostate cancer could be retrieved in 63% of the paired tumour samples. The highest concordance of AI and retention of heterozygosity between tumour and plasma samples was 83% at the marker D8S360. There were high frequencies of LOH at the markers THRB, D7S522 and D8S137 in both types of specimens. The markers D11S898 and D11S1313 on the chromosome arm 11q showed frequent MSI. The comparison with established risk factors showed significant associations of an increase in prostate volume with AI at the combined markers D6S474/D7S522 in tumour tissues and at D7S522 in plasma samples (P < 0.04). In the primary tumours there was a further correlation of LOH at D11S1313 with increasing tPSA value (P = 0.005). The combination of total prostate-specific antigen (PSA) and % free PSA was associated with LOH at THRB in plasma samples. CONCLUSIONS: Plasma-based MS analysis may have clinical value for the molecular staging of prostate cancer."
18355840	Mismatch repair gene MSH3 polymorphism is associated with the risk of sporadic prostate cancer.	"PURPOSE: The mismatch repair system is a DNA repair mechanism that corrects mispaired bases during DNA replication errors. Cancer cells deficient in MMR proteins have a 10(2) to 10(3)-fold increase in the mutation rate. Single nucleotide polymorphisms of mismatch repair genes have been shown to cause a decrease in DNA repair activity. We hypothesized that mismatch repair gene polymorphism could be a risk factor for prostate cancer and p53 Pro/Pro genotype carriers could influence MSH3 and MSH6 polymorphisms. MATERIALS AND METHODS: DNA samples from 110 patients with prostate cancer and 110 healthy controls were analyzed by single strand conformational polymorphism and polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism to determine the genotypic frequency of 5 polymorphic loci on 2 MMR genes (MSH3 and MSH6) and p53 codon72. The chi-square test was applied to compare genotype frequency between patients and controls. RESULTS: A significant increase in the G/A+A/A genotype of MSH3 Pro222Pro was observed in patients compared to controls (OR 1.87, 95% CI 1.0-3.5). The frequency of A/G + G/G genotypes of MSH3 exon23 Thr1036Ala also tended to increase in patients (OR 1.57, 95% CI 0.92-2.72). In p53 codon72 Arg/Pro + Pro/Pro carriers the frequency of the AG + GG genotype of MSH3 exon23 was significantly increased in patients compared to controls (OR 2.1, 95% CI 1.05-4.34). CONCLUSIONS: To our knowledge this is the first report of the association of MSH3 gene polymorphisms in prostate cancer. These results suggest that the MSH3 polymorphism may be a risk factor for prostate cancer."
1841750	Genetic changes associated with prostate cancer in humans.	"We have detected allelic loss in a majority of prostate cancers analysed. These losses have been detected on several chromosomes known to harbour tumour suppressor genes important in the development of other tumour types. Elevated rates of loss of heterozygosity on chromosome 16q and 10q suggest that tumour suppressor genes important in the pathogenesis of prostate cancer may be present on these chromosomes. Conversely, determination of the frequency of ras gene mutations in prostate cancer tissue suggests that these genetic alterations play a minor part in both the initiation and progression of this disease in humans."
18577985	Rapid progression of prostate cancer in men with a BRCA2 mutation.	"Men with BRCA2 mutations have been found to be at increased risk of developing prostate cancer. There is a recent report that BRCA2 carriers with prostate cancer have poorer survival than noncarrier prostate cancer patients. In this study, we compared survival of men with a BRCA2 mutation and prostate cancer with that of men with a BRCA1 mutation and prostate cancer. We obtained the age at diagnosis, age at death or current age from 182 men with prostate cancer from families with a BRCA2 mutation and from 119 men with prostate cancer from families with a BRCA1 mutation. The median survival from diagnosis was 4.0 years for men with a BRCA2 mutation vs 8.0 years for men with a BRCA1 mutation, and the difference was highly significant (P<0.01). It may be important to develop targeted chemotherapies to treat prostate cancer in men with a BRCA2 mutation."
1871551	Cytogenetic studies of prostatic cancer.	"In this study we wanted to find out if the size or position of the constitutive C-band positive heterochromatin regions of chromosomes was associated with variation in prostatic cancer predisposition. We found no such association when comparing the whole patient group with healthy controls, but younger (less than 70 years) cancer patients had significantly higher frequencies of large C-bands on chromosomes 1 and 16 than older patients (greater than 70 years). This could indicate a possible relationship between the amount of constitutive heterochromatin on chromosomes 1 and 16 and susceptibility to early development of prostatic cancer. The purpose of this study was to examine if the number of AgNORs was higher in malignant than normal or hyperplastic prostatic tissue, and if the number of AgNORs increased with increasing grade of malignancy. More AgNOR dots were found in the prostatic adenocarcinomas (average 24/cell) than in the normal and hyperplastic prostates (average 13/cell). The poorly differentiated adenocarcinomas had more AgNORs than the moderately and well differentiated cancers. The data indicate that analysis of silver staining-positive material in intact interphase cells may help distinguish between benign and malignant prostatic tumors, and between highly malignant and low malignant carcinomas. The purpose was to find consistent and specific chromosome abnormalities in primary prostatic adenocarcinomas. Because then existing techniques for culturing human neoplastic prostatic tissue rarely yielded sufficiant epithelial cell growth and mitosis we decided to modify these techniques. Tumor samples from 82 patients were processed for short-term culture. Cytogenetic analysis was successful in 57 tumors, 42 of which were cultured after September 1, 1988, when the modifications were implemented. Thirteen of the 15 primary tumor samples that contained clonal karyotypic abnormalities were processed after September 1, 1988. Loss of chromosomal material from 7q, 8p, and 10q, and structural aberrations of bands 7q22 and 10q24 were the most common aberrations found. From these data it may be inferred that both loss of tumor suppressor genes and activation of oncogenes located in the breakpoint regions may be important pathogenetic events in the development or progression of prostatic adenocarcinoma. In this study we wanted to examine the clinical implications of karyotypic abnormalities. We found a significant difference in survival after diagnosis and surgery between patients whose tumors had clonal structural abnormalities (A), patients whose tumors had nonclonal changes (NA), and patients whose tumors had normal karyotypes only (N).(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)"
1873816	Wild-type p53 suppresses growth of human prostate cancer cells containing mutant p53 alleles.	"Evidence supporting a broad role for the inactivation of the p53 gene in human tumorigenesis has been provided by studies showing that the p53 gene is mutated in many human cancers. In this study, we report on the mutational status of the p53 gene in prostate cancer cells and provide functional evidence that the wild-type p53 gene may have a role in suppressing prostatic tumorigenesis. Sequence analysis of exons 5-8 of the p53 gene reveals that three of five prostate cancer cell lines (TSUPr-1, PC3, DU145) contain mutations which alter the amino acid sequence of this most highly conserved portion of the gene. One of two primary prostatic cancer specimens examined also contained a mutation in this region. Transfection of the wild-type p53 gene versus a mutated p53 gene into two cell lines with p53 mutations results in reduced colony formation. Wild-type p53 gene expression is apparently incompatible with continued growth of these tumor cells inasmuch as none of the colonies which formed after wild-type transfections retain the transfected p53 sequences. Immunocytochemical data indicate that prostate carcinoma cells expressing the transfected wild-type p53 gene are growth arrested because they exhibit a reduced level of thymidine incorporation into DNA. This study is the first report of p53 gene mutations in prostate cancer cells and suggests a functional role for the p53 gene in suppressing prostatic tumorigenesis."
1911201	Flow cytometric analysis of DNA ploidy and S-phase fraction from prostatic carcinomas: implications for prognosis and response to endocrine therapy.	"We analysed ploidy and S-phase fraction (SPF) from 78 paraffin-embedded primary prostatic carcinomas by DNA flow cytometry. DNA aneuploidy and above median (4.2%) SPF were both associated with high tumour grade, large size of prostate and presence of distant metastases. Both aneuploidy and high SPF (greater than 4.2%) indicated short 10-year progression-free (P = 0.01 for ploidy and P = 0.0002 for SPF), overall (P = 0.004 and P less than 0.0001) as well as prostate cancer survival (P = 0.002 and P less than 0.0001). Ten-year overall survival rate was 45% in cases with SPF below 4.2% and 0% in those with higher values, whereas the corresponding prostate cancer-specific survival rates were 80% and 11%, respectively. None of the seven tumours with SPF above 12% showed an objective response to endocrine therapy, whereas 26/49 (52%) of those with lower SPF values responded (P = 0.01). DNA ploidy, tumour grade, T-stage or M-stage did not significantly correlate with endocrine responsiveness. SPF was also the best predictor of progression free survival in patients treated hormonally. In conclusion, detection of high SPF in prostate cancer may indicate lack of hormonal responsiveness and poor prognosis."
1978938	Allelic loss of chromosomes 16q and 10q in human prostate cancer.	"Recent advances in understanding the molecular genetics of common adult tumors have indicated that multiple genetic alterations including the activation of oncogenes and the inactivation of tumor suppressor genes are important in the pathogenesis of these tumors. Loss of heterozygosity is a hallmark of tumor suppressor gene inactivation and has been used to identify chromosomal regions that contain these genes. We have examined allelic loss in the most common tumor in men, prostate cancer. Twenty-eight prostate cancer specimens have been examined for loss of heterozygosity at 11 different chromosomal arms including 3p, 7q, 9q, 10p, 10q, 11p, 13q, 16p, 16q, 17p, and 18q. Fifty-four percent (13/24) of clinically localized tumors and 4 of 4 metastatic tumors showed loss of heterozygosity on at least one chromosome. Chromosomes 16q and 10q exhibited the highest frequency of loss of heterozygosity with 30% of tumors showing loss at these chromosomes. These data demonstrate that allelic loss is a common event in prostate cancer and suggest that chromosomes 16q and 10q may contain the sites of tumor suppressor genes important in the pathogenesis of human prostate cancer."
1986144	Two prostate carcinoma cell lines demonstrate abnormalities in tumor suppressor genes.	"Two prostate carcinoma cell lines, DU-145 and PC-3, were examined for abnormalities in the retinoblastoma (Rb) and the p53 putative tumor suppressor genes. We found an abnormal Rb gene product in DU-145 using Western blot analysis. Polymerase chain reaction amplification followed by direct DNA sequencing demonstrated a base substitution mutation that generates a stop codon in exon 21. On Northern, Southern, and Western blot analysis, the p53 gene and its product appear to be normal in DU-145. PC-3, however, failed to demonstrate expression of either the p53 transcript on Northern blot analysis or the p53 protein on Western blot analysis, while the Rb gene products appeared to be normal on both Northern and Western blot analysis. This work extends the correlation between abnormal expression of putative tumor suppressor genes and human malignancies."
2217208	Promoter deletion and loss of retinoblastoma gene expression in human prostate carcinoma.	"Mutational inactivation of the retinoblastoma gene (RB) is found in all retinoblastomas and in a subset of other human neoplasms, including sarcomas of bone or soft tissue and carcinomas of lung or breast. Exogenous copies of wild-type RB have been shown to suppress the tumorigenicity of several types of tumor cells with endogenous RB mutations, including a previously described human prostatic carcinoma cell line. To further support a role for RB inactivation in the genesis of prostate cancer, seven primary or metastatic prostate carcinoma specimens were examined for evidence of RB mutation. By the use of immunoblot analysis and immunostaining of histologic sections, RB-encoded protein was readily detected in tumor cells of five specimens, was equivocally detected in one specimen, and was apparently absent from tumor cells of one specimen. RB mutations in the latter case were precisely characterized as (i) a deletion of 103 nucleotides containing transcriptional start sites and (ii) loss of the second RB allele. The 103-base-pair deletion was sufficient to abolish the promoter activity of upstream DNA sequences in a heterologous expression system. These results (i) demonstrate that RB can be inactivated in vivo by mutation of its promoter, (ii) confirm the existence of RB mutations in some human prostate carcinomas, and (iii) suggest the use of immunohistochemical methods to screen for RB mutations in clinical samples of common adult neoplasms."
2386903	"DNA content in prostatic adenocarcinoma. A flow cytometry study of the predictive value of aneuploidy for tumor volume, percentage Gleason grade 4 and 5, and lymph node metastases."	"DNA content of prostatic adenocarcinoma was determined by flow cytometry on formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissue from 57 radical prostatectomies. This was done to define the relationship of aneuploidy to prostatic adenocarcinoma grade, volume, and pathologic stage and to examine its utility in candidates for surgical treatment. Aneuploidy was found in 26 (46%) cases. With one exception, all of the aneuploid cases were found in tumors larger than 4 cc. The percentage of aneuploid cases increased with advancing pathologic stage, and it was highest in those cases with lymph node metastases. This percentage was also higher among more poorly differentiated tumors. However, diploid tumors were also found among these groups, and the relationship between aneuploidy versus pathologic stage and grade did not achieve statistical significance. Except for a 91% specificity for tumor volume greater than 4 cc, the sensitivity and specificity of DNA content analysis to predict these groups was low (50% to 72%). It is concluded that aneuploidy is a later event linked to tumor progression, but it is not a requirement for progression to occur. The overlap in aneuploid and diploid tumor behavior precludes the use of DNA content analysis as an independent predictor to direct preoperative treatment of prostatic carcinoma."
2837590	Flow cytometric analysis of comedocarcinoma of the prostate: an uncommon histopathological variant of prostatic adenocarcinoma.	"Pathological data from 321 patients who underwent radical prostatectomy or cystoprostatectomy with a diagnosis of prostatic adenocarcinoma were reviewed. Of these specimens 4 (1.2 per cent) demonstrated histopathological findings consistent with prostatic comedocarcinoma. Prostatic acid phosphatase and prostate specific antigen detected by immunoperoxidase technique confirmed the prostatic origin of all comedocarcinomas studied. Flow cytometric analysis of deparaffinized sections from these specimens as well as a total of 40 representative specimens from normal prostate, and low, intermediate and high grade prostatic carcinomas was performed. Frequency of aneuploidy in low, intermediate and high grade prostatic adenocarcinoma was 0, 43 and 75 per cent, respectively. All cases of prostatic comedocarcinoma studied had distinctly aneuploid deoxyribonucleic acid histograms and the mean deoxyribonucleic acid content in comedocarcinoma was the highest of all groups analyzed. The mean time to recurrence in patients with comedocarcinoma was 13 months. Our flow cytometric data suggest that prostatic comedocarcinoma represents a potentially aggressive tumor demonstrating cytogenetic aberration shown to be associated with poor clinical outcome in prostatic adenocarcinoma."
2849989	Structure-function studies of murine epidermal growth factor: expression and site-directed mutagenesis of epidermal growth factor gene.	"Wild-type murine epidermal growth factor (mEGF) and mutants with Leu47 replaced by serine and valine, respectively, have been produced by recombinant DNA methodology. A synthetic gene for mEGF was fused to the coding sequence for the signal peptide of the outer membrane protein A (ompA) of Escherichia coli in the secretion vector pIN-III-ompA3, and the recombinant plasmid was used to transform E. coli. Upon induction of gene expression, mEGF and the mutants was expressed and secreted into the periplasmic space. Purification of the wild-type Leu47-mEGF and the mutants was carried out by reversed-phase and anion-exchange high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC). Amino acid analysis and Western blot analysis further confirmed the identities of the proteins. Specific activities for wild-type and mutant proteins were measured in both mEGF receptor binding and autophosphorylation assays. The recombinant mEGF has specific activities identical with that of mEGF purified from mouse submaxillary glands, while both mutants have reduced specific activities in both bioassays. The data demonstrate the importance of the highly conserved Leu47 residue in mEGF for full biological activity."
3029150	Site-specific mutagenesis of cDNA clones expressing a poliovirus proteinase.	"The cleavage of poliovirus precursor polypeptides occurs at specific amino acid pairs that are recognized by viral proteinases. Most of the polio-specific cleavages occur at glutamine-glycine (Q-G) pairs that are recognized by the viral-encoded proteinase 3C (formerly called P3-7c). In order to carry out a defined molecular genetic study of the enzymatic activity of protein 3C, we have made cDNA clones of the poliovirus genome. The cDNA region corresponding to protein 3C was inserted into an inducible bacterial expression vector. This recombinant plasmid (called pIN-III-C3-7c) utilizes the bacterial lipoprotein promoter to direct the synthesis of a precursor polypeptide that contains the amino acid sequence of protein 3C as well as the amino- and carboxy-terminal Q-G cleavage signals. These signals have been previously shown to allow autocatalytic production of protein 3C in bacteria transformed with plasmid pIN-III-C3-7c. We have taken advantage of the autocatalytic cleavage of 3C in a bacterial expression system to study the effects of site-specific mutagenesis on its proteolytic activity. One mutation that we have introduced into the cDNA region encoding 3C is a single amino acid insertion near the carboxy-terminal Q-G cleavage site. The mutant recombinant plasmid (designated pIN-III-C3-mu 10) directs the synthesis of a bacterial-polio precursor polypeptide that is like the wild-type construct (pIN-III-C3-7c). However, unlike the wild-type precursor, the mutant precursor cannot undergo autocatalytic cleavage to generate the mature proteinase 3C. Rather, the precursor is able to carry out cleavage at the amino-terminal Q-G site but not at the carboxy-terminal site. Thus, we have generated an altered poliovirus proteinase that is still able to carry out at least part of its cleavage activities but is unable to be a suitable substrate for self-cleavage at its carboxy-terminal Q-G pair."
3174494	Nonrandom involvement of chromosome 4 in the progression of rat prostatic cancer.	"Owing to progression of the original spontaneous Dunning R-3327 rat prostatic cancer, a large series of transplantable prostatic tumors have been isolated that differ widely in their histological degree of differentiation, growth rate, androgen sensitivity, and metastatic ability. Using these parameters as criteria, the full spectrum of disease progression is represented within this Dunning system of rat prostatic cancers, ranging from slow-growing, well-differentiated, androgen-sensitive, nonmetastatic forms to fast-growing, anaplastic, androgen-independent, highly metastatic forms. Cytogenetic analysis of the two least progressionally advanced Dunning cancers (i.e., histologically well-differentiated, slow-growing, nonmetastatic variants) demonstrated no structural or numerical chromosomal aberration, suggesting that the initial development of prostatic cancer may not require detectable cytogenetic changes. In contrast, all 16 of the progressionally more advanced Dunning variants analyzed had a series of characteristic structural and/or numerical chromosomal aberrations that minimally involved chromosome 4. This nonrandom involvement of chromosome 4 was consistently observed regardless of whether the karyotype of the cancer was near-diploid or hyperaneuploid, suggesting that chromosome 4 aberrations are specifically involved in the progression of rat prostatic cancer. In addition, all four variants that were highly metastatic had, besides aberration of chromosome 4, structural aberrations involving chromosomes 1, 2, and 11. Of the 14 variants that did not have a high metastatic ability, only two had a similar aberrations involving chromosomes 1, 2, 4, and 11, suggesting that these specific chromosomal aberrations may be necessary, albeit not sufficient, for a high metastatic ability of rat prostatic cancers."
3177480	"Fragile X expression in Martin-Bell syndrome, intellectually normal individuals, and neoplasia, interpreted by a viral hypothesis."	"We present data on fragile X expression in lymphocytes obtained from the following patients: a university student, an infertile couple, 6 of 22 prostatic cancer patients, a meningioma patient, and members of families with meningioma and familial gliomas. All patients were of normal intelligence. In addition, we report 3 cases of central nervous system (CNS) tumors in more typical fragile X families. We suggest that the fragile X expression as well as the clinical findings may be caused by a viral (or similar) infection. The virus may require a receptor protein coded by one allele of a gene on the X chromosome."
3395997	Cytogenetic characterization of an established xenografted prostatic adenocarcinoma cell line (PC-82).	"Detailed cytogenetic analysis was performed of a xenografted human prostatic adenocarcinoma cell line PC-82. A direct preparation method was developed that yielded metaphases of good quality. Flow cytometric data and banding analysis of metaphases showed a near-tetraploid karyotype with 18 consistent marker chromosomes. As a result of the rearrangements involved, parts of chromosomes 2, 3, 4, 7, 9, 10, 15, 18, and 21 were homozygous, while regions on 2p, 13q, and 17q were apparently completely lost. In contrast to this, some regions on #2, #5, and, especially, on #1 were present in three or even four times the normal copy number. Comparison of affected chromosomes in PC-82 with all data available on prostatic carcinoma showed chromosomes 1, 2, 3, 6, 7, 10, and 15 to be involved in rearrangements in over 50% of all prostatic carcinomas. When only data from primary prostatic adenocarcinomas (including PC-82) were taken into account it appeared that chromosomes 1, 7, and 10 were involved in all five primary tumors studied."
3413126	Analysis of gene amplification in human tumor cell lines.	"Oncogene amplification has been observed in various primary tumors and tumor-derived cell lines. In several types of cancer, amplification of specific oncogenes is correlated with the stage of tumor progression. To estimate the frequency of gene amplification in other tumor types and to determine whether the ability to grow in vivo is associated with gene amplification in tumor cell lines, we have developed a modified version of the in-gel renaturation assay that detects human DNA sequences of unknown nature amplified as little as 7- to 8-fold. This assay was used to screen 16 cell lines derived from various solid tumors and leukemias. Amplified DNA sequences were detected in only one cell line, Calu-3 lung adenocarcinoma. This cell line was found to contain coamplified NGL (formerly termed neu) and ERBA1 oncogenes. However, when one of the amplification-negative cell lines, PC-3 prostatic carcinoma, was selected for in vivo growth in nude mice, amplified DNA sequences became detectable in these cells. The amplified sequences included the MYC oncogene, which showed no amplification in the parental cell line but was amplified 10- to 12-fold in the in vivo-selected cells. MYC amplification may, therefore, provide tumor cells with a selective advantage specific for in vivo growth."
3601807	Activated Ki-ras oncogene in human prostatic adenocarcinoma.	"The role of cellular oncogenes in the development of human prostate cancer has not been extensively studied. A search for activated oncogenes was undertaken by testing DNA isolated from prostatic adenocarcinoma tissues for transforming activity in a 3T3 transfection assay. A transforming sequence homologous to Ki-ras was detected in one of the samples. DNA from the other cancers was negative in the transformation assay, suggesting that the activation of oncogenes, at least those detectable by the 3T3 transfection assay, is not a frequent event in prostate cancer. Amplification of genomic oncogene sequences in prostatic tissues was also examined, but amplification of Ki-ras, Ha-ras, c-myc, N-myc, c-sis, or c-fos was not detectable in any of the samples."
3923441	Up-promoter mutations in the lpp gene of Escherichia coli.	"The promoter of the gene for the major outer membrane lipoprotein, the most abundant protein in Escherichia coli, is considered to be one of the strongest promoters in E. coli. The nucleotide sequences of the -10 and the -35 regions of the lpp promoter were altered in a step-wise manner to conform to their respective consensus sequences by synthetic oligonucleotide-directed site-specific mutagenesis. The mutated promoters were then fused to the lacZ gene to measure promoter activity. The beta-galactosidase activity increased approximately 1.9 and 2.4 fold when the -10 region (AATACT) was altered to TATACT(P1) and TATAAT (consensus sequence; P2), respectively. Similarly, it increased approximately 1.2 and 4.2 fold, when the -35 region (TTCTCA) was altered to TTCACA(R1) and TTGACA (consensus sequence; R2), respectively. When the mutations at the -10 and -35 regions were combined, the overall improvement of the promoter activity for R2-P1 was 4.0 fold over that of the wild-type promoter, while it was only 2.5 fold for R2-P2. These results indicate that substantial improvement of the promoter activity can be achieved by changing either of the two key regions to their respective consensus sequences. However, the complete conformity to consensus sequences at both regions does not necessarily result in the highest activity. With use of the improved lpp promoter in an expression cloning vehicle pIN-III-ompA, staphylococcal nuclease A was produced at a level of approximately 47% of the total cellular protein."
4018801	Chromosome study of five cancers of the prostate.	"Nonrandom chromosome changes were sought in direct preparations of tumour material from the primary site of four carcinomas and one leiomyosarcoma of the prostate. Two of the carcinomas had previously received oestrogen therapy. A deleted chromosome 10, del(10)(q24), was found in all four carcinomas and may represent a specific marker in prostatic carcinoma. Three of the carcinomas also had a deleted chromosome 7, del(7)(q22), while the fourth had a 7p+. Deleted chromosomes 7 and 10 were not identified among the markers present in the leiomyosarcoma. All five tumours contained one or more abnormal chromosomes derived from chromosome 1. A Y chromosome was present in the leiomyosarcoma but in none of the carcinomas."
6299722	Induction of ouabain-resistant mutants by chemical carcinogens in rat prostate epithelial cells.	"We determined optimal conditions to quantitatively select ouabain-resistant (Ouar) mutants induced by chemical carcinogens in a rat prostate epithelial cell line (RPYK). These conditions included selection of Ouar mutants in 3 mM ouabain, an expression time of two days following a two-day treatment with carcinogens, and a reseeding density of 2 X 10(5) mutagenized cells per 100 mm dish to select mutants in ouabain. Ouar mutants induced by N-methyl-N'-nitro-N'-nitrosoguanidine (MNNG) remained stably Ouar when passaged in nonselective medium. Hemicyst formation, a characteristic of epithelial cells, was reversibly inhibited by ouabain in wild-type cells and was resistant to ouabain in Ouar cells. The direct-acting carcinogens MNNG and methylazoxymethanol-acetate (MAMA) and the environmentally widespread procarcinogens aflatoxin B1 and benzo(a)pyrene increased the frequency of Ouar mutants in RPYK cells. The procedures developed here now make it possible to detect some environmental carcinogens likely to cause prostate cancer by virtue of their ability to mutate cultured prostate epithelial RPYK cells. The sensitivity of the RPYK cell line to aflatoxin-induced cytotoxicity and mutagenesis also makes it a useful cell system in which to study enzymes governing the conversion of aflatoxin to genotoxic metabolites."
6354489	"Metabolic activation of promutagens, detectable in Ames' Salmonella assay, by 5000 X g supernatant of rat ventral prostate."	"Induction of aryl hydrocarbon hydroxylase (AHH) and 7-ethoxyresorufin-O-deethylase (7-EOD) activities as well as of benzo[a]pyrene (BP) metabolite formation in rat prostatic microsomes has been demonstrated after treatment with beta-naphthoflavone (BNF). The capacity to convert promutagenic compounds to ultimate mutagenic metabolites in the Ames' Salmonella assay by 5000 X g supernatant of rat ventral prostate was investigated. Male rats were treated with BNF, polychlorinated biphenyls (PCB; Arochlor 1254), phenobarbital (PB) and the vehicle, corn oil. PCB or BNF pretreatment increased the AHH- and 7-EOD activities 100-200-fold in the rat prostate 5000 X g supernatant (S-5 fraction). Epoxide hydrolase (EH) and glutathione-S-transferase (GST) activities were not affected while UDP-glucuronosyltransferase (UDP-GT) was increased 2.2- and 2.5-fold by PCB and BNF, respectively. PB did not significantly affect any of the enzyme activities measured. A dose-dependent increase in mutagenic response versus amount of 5000 X g supernatant and promutagen (aflatoxin B1 (AFB), 2-aminofluorene (2-AF), BP) was observed. The most pronounced activation was obtained with S-5 fraction from BNF- or PCB-treated rats. The great sensitivity of prostatic AHH to certain inducers and the capacity of the prostate to produce mutagenic metabolites might be of importance for initiation of prostatic cancer by environmental factors."
6938037	Tumour ploidy for characterization of prostatic carcinoma: flow-cytofluorometric DNA studies using aspiration biopsy material.	"151 patients with miscellaneous, treated and untreated prostatic lesions were examined by transrectal fine-needle biopsy. The results of cytological assessment were correlated with the results of flow-cytofluorometric DNA-analysis. The incidence and degree of aneuploidy were determined. Cases with non-malignant cytologic findings were mostly diploid. Poorly differentiated carcinomas were nearly exclusively aneuploid, with aneuploidy mostly in the tri- to tetraploid region. Well and moderately differentiated carcinomas were diploid in one-third of the cases. The other two thirds were aneuploid, nearly exclusively in the tetraploid region. The biological significance of these results, in the prognostic prediction for patients with prostatic carcinoma, is discussed. This cytofluorometric method can be used in routine clinical work and may in the future form a suitable basis for the management of these patients."
7478543	Localization of potential tumor suppressor loci to a < 2 Mb region on chromosome 17q in human prostate cancer.	"We recently demonstrated a high frequency of loss of heterozygosity (LOH) at the D17S856 and D17S855 (within the BRCA1 gene) loci in primary prostate cancer, suggesting that the BRCA1 gene and/or other tumor suppressor gene(s) located within the interval of the D17S856 and D17S855 loci and/or within the vicinity of this interval may be important in prostate cancer (Cancer Res., 55: 1002-1005, 1995). To further define the exact boundary of the deleted region (i.e., D17S856/D17S855) and to detect other possible LOH regions on the long arm of chromosome 17, we analysed 23 matched normal and tumor DNAs with 15 polymorphic microsatellite markers spanning chromosome 17q12-21. Eleven of 22 (50%) informative tumors showed allelic deletion at one or more of the loci studied. A minimal area of LOH was identified to extend from the proximal boundary at the D17S776 locus to the distal boundary at the D17S855 locus, spanning an estimated < 2 Mb segment on chromosome 17q21. Our results suggest that a potential tumor suppressor gene(s) may reside in the < 2 Mb region centromeric (inclusive) to the BRCA1 gene and that this tumor suppressor gene(s) may be involved in the formation of prostate cancer."
7501545	DNA heterogeneity determined by flow cytometry in prostatic adenocarcinoma--necessitating multiple site analysis.	"Although DNA ploidy analysis of prostate cancer is generally associated with grade, stage, clinical outcome, and responsiveness to androgen therapy, one possible reason cited for contrary reports may be tumor heterogeneity. A preliminary report using flow cytometric analysis of punch biopsies demonstrated DNA heterogeneity in five of nine patients. We evaluated 75 patients by cutting whole mounts of formalin fixed prostatectomy tissue every 0.6 cm. All malignant areas and a selected normal area were circumscribed, excised, remounted, and 1-3 50 mu thick sections removed. The nuclei were extracted by a Hedley technique and the DNA stained with propidium iodide. Each whole mount had an average of 1 distinct malignant area (range of 1-6 areas per whole mount block). Nuclei were analyzed on a Becton Dickinson (San Jose, CA) FACScan flow cytometer equipped with RFIT DNA software program. After excluding histograms with CVs > 8.0% and/or ""suspicious"" diploid histograms having a right ""shoulder,"" 75 or 87 patients still had > or = 2 malignant sites available for analysis (average 4, range 2-9 malignant sites/patient). The 322 histograms had an average CV of 4.4%. Thirty of 75 patients (40%) showed DNA heterogeneity in multiple samples taken from the same prostate. There were 37 prostates with only diploid (D), 1 with only tetraploid (T), 7 with only aneuploid (A), 20 with D plus A, 7 with D plus T, 2 with D plus T plus A, and 1 with a D plus suspected hypodiploid DNA content. Exclusion of the tetraploid and ""near diploid aneuploid"" cases still resulted in 16% (12/75) of the patients having a diploid versus aneuploid DNA content heterogeneity. Because 40% of the prostates contained a different ploidy depending on which area was sampled, this report suggests multiple sites of malignancy must be analyzed to more accurately assess the ploidy status of prostatic adenocarcinoma."
7502426	Chromosomal anomalies in atypical adenomatous hyperplasia and carcinoma of the prostate using fluorescence in situ hybridization.	"OBJECTIVES. The genetic alterations of atypical adenomatous hyperplasia (AAH) of the prostate, a possible precursor of prostate adenocarcinoma, have not been previously investigated. METHODS. We used fluorescence in situ hybridization with centromere-specific probes for chromosomes 7, 8, 10, 12, and Y to evaluate chromosomal anomalies in atypical adenomatous hyperplasia (23 foci) and adenocarcinoma (31 foci) in 19 whole-mount radical prostatectomy specimens. RESULTS. Chromosomal anomalies were found in 2 foci (9%) of AAH and 17 foci (55%) of carcinoma. There was no relationship between the chromosomal anomalies in AAH and matched foci of carcinoma. CONCLUSIONS. These findings indicate that AAH is not obviously linked genetically to prostate cancer, although it occasionally contains chromosomal anomalies."
7504522	Extensive genetic alterations in prostate cancer revealed by dual PCR and FISH analysis.	"The genetic alterations that underlie prostate tumorigenesis are assumed to comprise gain or loss of specific chromosomal regions, whole chromosomes, or sequence-specific mutations. Existing data have not demonstrated clear specificity of whole chromosome or regional chromosomal gain or loss that characterizes entire individual malignant lesions, or all malignant lesions, within a cancerous prostate. We have analyzed tissues from 13 patients for target sequences by using PCR and FISH techniques on paired malignant or prostatic intraepithelial neoplastic (PIN) and benign samples (usually from different areas of the same paraffin section). We exercised stringent histologic control over these samples by examining small (< 5 mm2), discrete regions of sectioned benign, malignant, and PIN tissue. The same histologic region was examined on serial sections by FISH and PCR analysis. The tissues were examined for numerical aberrations involving chromosomes 4 (as a control), 7, 8, 10, and the Y by FISH analysis, and for gain or loss of chromosome 7 and chromosomal arms 8p, 10q, and Yp by PCR analysis. The concurrent application of PCR and FISH to microdissected prostatic tissues yielded evidence of higher frequencies of genetic aberration in prostate cancers than those found with either method alone or by other approaches. These results indicate the power of simultaneous genetic assays that are closely linked to specific tumor histology."
7511271	[Significance of numerical chromosome aberrations in prostate cancer]	"Thirty-one routinely processed radical prostatectomy specimens were examined for the presence of numerical chromosomal aberrations by in situ hybridization with centromeric nucleic acid probes specific for chromosomes 7, 10, 17, X, and Y. In eight of the prostatectomy specimens, chromosome numbers consistent with a normal male karyotype were found. Three cases, in addition to diploid chromosome numbers, showed a focal doubling of hybridization signals, consistent with tetraploidy. The other 20 cases displayed more or less marked numerical chromosomal aberrations. In this group, the appearance of numerical chromosomal aberrations often showed considerable local heterogeneity and was significantly correlated with tumor stage, Gleason grades, and tumor volume. We conclude that in prostatic cancer the presence of numerical chromosomal aberrations is associated with advanced disease. Especially in low differentiated tumors local heterogeneity in chromosome numbers can be very marked."
7512791	Androgen receptor status in localized and locally progressive hormone refractory human prostate cancer.	"Heterogeneity in human androgen receptor (hAR) expression in prostate cancer is considered to be implicated in tumor progression. hAR expression was therefore studied immunohistochemically in localized and locally progressive, hormone refractory (HR) prostate cancer. Because altered functional activity of the hAR may be due to changes in the structural integrity of the hAR gene, exons 2 to 8 of the hAR gene were assessed for mutations by single-strand conformation polymorphism (SSCP) analysis and exon 1 was analyzed for the size of the CAG repeat. The hormone binding capacity, a prerequisite for ligand-regulated receptor function, was determined by a ligand binding assay. Coexpression of the hAR and prostate-specific antigen (PSA) was studied by a sequential double immunoenzymatic staining to verify whether PSA expression is a parameter of hAR function. Almost all human prostatic carcinomas revealed heterogeneous hAR expression, regardless of tumor differentiation and progression. Putative predominance of hAR-negative tumor areas in HR prostate cancer was not observed. No hAR gene mutations or major changes in the CAG repeat were found in the 18 HR carcinomas or in the 9 control samples. Moreover, all selected hAR-expressing cancers were able to bind the synthetic androgen methyltrienolone (R1881). Immunoenzymatic double staining revealed even PSA expression in hAR-negative tumor areas. PSA immunohistochemistry in human prostatic carcinomas therefore is of no use in determining hAR functional activity. Thus, most prostatic carcinomas, even when progressed to a state of hormone insensitivity, contain a structurally intact hAR gene, heterogeneously expressed with retained androgen binding capacity."
7515114	p53 in prostate cancer: frequent expressed transition mutations.	"BACKGROUND: Carcinoma of the prostate is the second most common cause of cancer deaths in men. Little is known about the pathogenesis of this disease and the molecular genetic events that contribute to its development. Molecular studies have begun to reveal biologic characteristics of this disease, notably, the loss of genetic material as determined by studies of restriction fragment length polymorphism, oncogene activation, and production and response to growth factors. PURPOSE: Our goal was to characterize p53 gene mutations in human carcinoma of the prostate and to analyze base-pair changes within the coding regions of p53 mRNA (exons 4 through 11). METHODS: Forty-four prostate tissue specimens and four metastatic lesions were obtained from 48 prostate carcinoma patients who had surgical resection. RNA was either immediately extracted or the specimens were snap-frozen in liquid N2 and stored at -70 degrees C until used. Total RNA was extracted from tumor specimens. Expression of p53 was analyzed by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) analysis of mRNA (RNA/PCR). Following confirmation of the RNA/PCR products by Southern blotting, quantitation of message levels was performed by laser densitometry. Absolute area integrations of the curves representing each tissue were then compared after adjustment for the housekeeping gene c-N-ras. Two overlapping regions (exons 4-6 and 6-11) were examined by a nonisotopic PCR single-strand conformation polymorphism (SSCP) analysis system. All specimens displaying SSCP abnormalities were sequenced in both directions to confirm the findings. RESULTS: Of the 48 prostate specimens, three (6%) (two primary and one metastatic) displayed nearly undetectable expression of p53 mRNA (samples PS-70, L113, and PS-95) and 17 (35%) of 48 expressed mutant p53 mRNA encoding amino acid substitutions within exons 4-11 (14 of 17) and/or deletions within the p53 transcripts (three of 17). Overall, the frequency of p53 gene abnormalities that would result in altered protein expression was 20 (42%) of 48 in the tissue samples from prostate carcinoma patients. Nucleotide base-pair transitions of A-->G or T-->C were the most frequent. CONCLUSIONS: p53 mutations are common in prostate cancer. The patterns of p53 gene mutations are dramatically different from data obtained on other cancers and indicate the possible involvement of a carcinogenic agent(s). IMPLICATIONS: Further studies are required to determine the biologic role of p53 gene alterations in the development and progression of this disease and to determine whether p53 mutations can be useful as prognostic markers or for the selection of better treatments for prostate cancer patients."
7518348	Aneuploidy and aneusomy of chromosome 7 detected by fluorescence in situ hybridization are markers of poor prognosis in prostate cancer.	"Fluorescence in situ hybridization is a new methodology which can be used to detect cytogenetic anomalies within interphase tumor cells. We used this technique to identify nonrandom numeric chromosomal alterations in tumor specimens from the poorest prognosis patients with pathological stages T2N0M0 and T3N0M0 prostate carcinomas. Among 1368 patients treated by radical prostatectomy, 25 study patients were ascertained who died most quickly from progressive prostate carcinoma within 3 years of diagnosis and surgery. Tumors from 25 control patients who survival for more than 5 years and who were matched for age, tumor histological grade, and pathological stage also were evaluated. The tumors from all 25 (100%) poor prognosis patients and from 11 of 25 (44%) control patients were found to be aneuploid by fluorescence in situ hybridization (P < 0.0001). Alterations of chromosome 7 were observed in 24 of the tumors (96%) from the poor prognosis patients versus 3 tumors (12%) from the control group (P < 0.0001). Moreover, a characteristic aneuploidy pattern with multiple abnormal chromosomes and a hypertetrasomic population was generally found in tumors from the poor prognosis patients. This preliminary study suggests that fluorescence in situ hybridization studies of prostate cancer specimens may help to identify those patients at highest risk for early cancer death."
7530484	"Comparative genomic hybridization, allelic imbalance, and fluorescence in situ hybridization on chromosome 8 in prostate cancer."	"Due to problems with primary tumor cell culture, conventional cytogenetics has yielded little insightful information on chromosomal alterations in prostate cancer. The primary aim of this study was to define the ability of comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) to detect and map genetic deletions in prostate tumors. A secondary aim was to apply multiple assays to individual tumors as a means of deciphering the mechanisms of genetic alterations in prostate cancer. CGH results were compared with allelic imbalance measurements at 29 distinct loci on chromosome 8 in 18 specimens (17 malignant and 1 benign). CGH detected no changes in cases where all informative PCR/RFLP loci were retained and detected all p arm deletions consisting of at least two loci. We estimate that in this study, the smallest deletions detected by CGH were approximately 20-30 cM. Physical mapping of subchromosomal arm deletions by CGH correlated well with allelic imbalance mapping by PCR/RFLP: The data agreed at 88% of loci on 8p and 92% of loci on 8q. Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) with multiple centromere probes and DNA content flow cytometry (FCM) also was performed on selected specimens. FISH revealed two cases of chromosome 8 aneusomy. In these two cases and three others, CGH showed simultaneous p arm deletion and q arm gain, suggesting isochromosome 8q formation. Together, these data suggested that, simple chromosomal aberrations were responsible for allelic losses on 8p and allelic gains on 8q in a significant number of prostate tumors. We also used CGH to examine relative DNA sequence copy number throughout the genome. Changes frequently associated with 8p loss include gains of 8q and losses of 13q, 16p, 16q, 17p, 17q, 20q, and Y. Cases with 8p loss exhibited five times the number of alterations as did cases without 8p loss."
7539277	Interphase cytogenetics of prostatic adenocarcinoma and precursor lesions: analysis of 25 radical prostatectomies and 17 adjacent prostatic intraepithelial neoplasias.	"Twenty-five radical prostatectomy specimens were screened for the presence of numerical chromosome changes within the adenocarcinoma as well as 17 adjacent prostatic intraepithelial neoplasias (PIN) by means of interphase in situ hybridization (ISH) to routinely processed tissue sections. To this end a defined alfoid repetitive DNA probe set was used, specific for the centromeres of chromosomes 1, 7, 8, 10, 15, and Y. The cytogenetic information was correlated with histopathological and clinical features as well as with DNA ploidy. Numerical aberrations of at least one chromosome were shown in 13 of 25 cases (52%). Alterations of chromosome 8 and loss of the Y chromosome were the most frequent findings (both 20%), followed by loss of chromosomes 15 (16%) and 10 (12%). Gain of chromosome 7 was seen in 8% of cases. No aberrations of chromosomes 7, 8, 10, and 15 were found in the adjacent PIN lesions, whereas loss of the Y chromosome in both PIN and tumor occurred in two cases. Also, (low level) aneuploidy was observed in 76% of these PIN lesions. Ploidy of the carcinomas as assessed by ISH correlated well with ploidy measured by DNA flow cytometry (FCM; P < 0.02). Due to the more specific correspondence between ISH and tumor pathology, pathologic grade correlated with ISH aneuploidy (P < 0.05), whereas FCM ploidy did not. Furthermore, genetic heterogeneity within a tumor was seen, as judged by the focal appearance of chromosomal aberrations. Chromosomal alterations occurred in all grades and stages, although loss of chromosome 10, gain of chromosome 7, and aberrations of chromosome 8 tended to predominate in more advanced cancers."
7542002	Comparison of fluorescence in situ hybridization and flow cytometric DNA ploidy analysis in paraffin-embedded prostatic adenocarcinoma specimens.	"Cancer cell nuclei extracted from 15 paraffin-embedded radical prostatectomy specimens were examined with fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) and flow cytometry (FCM) for DNA ploidy. Repetitive chromosome-specific alpha-satellite DNA probes to centromeres 7 and 10 were used in the FISH assay. Results from FISH and FCM were compared and viewed in relation to clinical experience. Of the 15 tumors examined, 9 were hyperdiploid for at least one chromosome by FISH assay. Seven were aneuploid by FCM, showing a good correlation between the two methods (P = .006). Using either evidence of clinical progression or a postoperative prostate-specific antigen (PSA) level > 0.5 ng/mL by Hybritech assay to indicate the risk of clinical progression, 56% of FISH hyperdiploid tumors had a risk of progression of carcinoma versus 17% of FISH diploid tumors. A preoperative PSA level > 30 ng/mL had a marginal correlation with risk of progression (P = .05). We demonstrate that FISH is a useful tool for chromosomal analysis in paraffin-embedded tumor specimens."
7542226	"ras, p53 and HPV status in benign and malignant prostate tumors."	"To study the role of ras, p53 genes and HPV virus (16 and 18) in the development of prostate cancer, we analyzed tissue sections from 27 patients affected with carcinomas (stages A to D) and from 24 patients with adenomas. Mutations of H, K and N-ras and p53 (exons 2-9) were studied by SSCP and DNA sequencing. Accumulation of p53 protein was studied by immunohistochemistry on tissue sections. Tumors were also analyzed for the presence of HPV16 and -18 sequences by PCR and DNA hybridization with sequence-specific oligonucleotides. No mutation was found in the three ras genes studied, either in carcinomas or adenomas. By SSCP analysis we identified p53 mutations in only 2 of 19 carcinomas studied, both in exon 7. Immunohistochemical results strongly correlate with the SSCP results: p53 protein was positive in tumors with p53 mutation but not in others; 32% of studied adenomas had detectable HPV16 DNA, while 53% of carcinomas were HPV16+. Among these I presented a p53 mutation. No HPV18 E6 sequence could be detected. Our data show that in prostate tumors from France, mutations of p53 and ras are rare events but that these tumors display detectable HPV16 DNA at a high frequency. The low incidence of p53 mutation, associated to a significant proportion of tumors showing HPV16 DNA, could suggest that in prostate cancer HPV16 infection could participate in p53 inactivation by E6."
7549122	[Genetic alterations in localized cancers of the prostate: identification of a common region of deletion on the chromosome 18q]	"Prostate cancer is one of the most common malignancies in men. Few authors have attempted to identify consistent genetic alterations at the molecular level in adenocarcinoma of the prostate, but those most frequently reported are loss of heterozygosity (LOH) involving chromosome arms 8p, 10q, 16q, and 18q and inactivation of the TP53 tumor suppressor gene. In order to determine if alterations frequently found in other adenocarcinomas (breast, ovarian, colorectal), including losses of genetic material from chromosome arms 1p, 3p, 7q, 8p, 11p, 17p, 17q, and 18q, are also involved in prostate cancer, we examined 20 localized early-stage prostate tumors. We detected no mutations of the TP53 gene. Allelic losses were found from 7q (33%), 8p (50%), 10q (20%), and 18q (33%). Furthermore, as the first step toward isolating tumor suppressor genes on 18q, we used six polymorphic markers and identified a small common deleted region between the chromosome 18 centromere and the D18S19 locus."
7550353	Frequency of homozygous deletion at p16/CDKN2 in primary human tumours.	"Many tumour types have been reported to have deletion of 9p21 (refs 1-6). A candidate target suppressor gene, p16 (p16INK4a/MTS-1/CDKN2), was recently identified within the commonly deleted region in tumour cell lines. An increasing and sometimes conflicting body of data has accumulated regarding the frequency of homozygous deletion and the importance of p16 in primary tumours. We tested 545 primary tumours by microsatellite analysis with existing and newly cloned markers around the p16 locus. We have now found that small homozygous deletions represent the predominant mechanism of inactivation at 9p21 in bladder tumours and are present in other tumour types, including breast and prostate cancer. Moreover, fine mapping of these deletions implicates a 170 kb minimal region that includes p16 and excludes p15."
7573365	"Novel fluorescence in situ hybridization approaches in solid tumors. Characterization of frozen specimens, touch preparations, and cytological preparations."	"Fluorescence in situ hybridization has emerged as an extremely important tool for detection and characterization of nonrandom chromosome aberrations in cancer. Fluorescence in situ hybridization assays have been very reliable in cytogenetic tumor preparations, but have been more unpredictable in archival, paraffin-embedded specimens. We describe novel approaches for detection of chromosome aberrations in frozen tumor specimens, touch preparations, and cytological preparations. These approaches are both simple and reproducible, with minimal case-to-case variation in hybridization efficiency or hybridization signal quality. We demonstrate potential applications of these novel approaches by evaluating: 1) significance of normal karyotypes in malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors; 2) p15/p16 copy number in prostate cancer; and 3) clonal chromosome 3p deletion in cytological preparations of pleural fluid from patients with mesothelioma."
7577722	Androgens inhibit the proliferation of a variant of the human prostate cancer cell line LNCaP.	"The paradoxical androgen response of R2, a subline of the human prostate cancer cell line LNCaP, is described here. Two androgens (DHT and R1881) decreased, in a dose-dependent manner, R2 cell proliferation and [3H]thymidine incorporation. These ligand and cell specific effects were accompanied by an increase in the metabolism of the vital dye MTT and in cell protein content. Both androgens increased the doubling time and the percentage of G0-G1 cells. No evidence of androgen-induced apoptosis was found. Cloning allowed the selection of two cell populations on the basis of the response to 10 nM of R1881. Long term culture of uncloned R2 cells with R1881 modified reversibly the pattern of androgen response. R2 was compared to the androgen-stimulated LNCaP-FGC subline to investigate the causes of their different androgen responsiveness. The androgen receptor (number, affinity for hormones and antihormones, sedimentation constant and molecular weight) and androgen receptor genes (exon size and exon 8 sequence) were found to be identical in the two sublines. EGF stimulated LNCaP-FGC but not R2. Both cells were slightly stimulated by basic FGF but were insensitive to IGF-I and TGF beta 1. In conclusion: (1) androgens inhibit the proliferation of R2 cells possibly by introducing a G0-G1 block; (2) this inhibition is incomplete because, at least in part, the R2 cell population is heterogeneous; (3) chronic androgen treatment induces reversible cell adaptation; and (4) there is no evidence that the loss of the classical stimulatory effect of androgen on cell proliferation and the gain of inhibitory effect are due to androgen receptor alteration or to a specific action of one of the four growth factors tested."
7587126	Genetic alterations in prostate cancer.	"A number of genetic changes have been documented in prostate cancer, ranging from allelic loss to point mutations and changes in DNA methylation patterns (summarized in Fig. 1). To date, the most consistent changes are those of allelic loss events, with the majority of tumors examined showing loss of alleles from at least one chromosomal arm. The short arm of chromosome 8, followed by the long arm of chromosome 16, appear to be the most frequent regions of loss, suggesting the presence of novel tumor suppressor genes. Deletions of one copy of the Rb and p53 genes are less frequent, as are mutations of the p53 gene, and accumulating evidence suggests the presence of an additional tumor suppressor gene on chromosome 17p, which is frequently inactivated in prostate cancer. Alterations in the E-cadherin/alpha-catenin-mediated cell-cell adhesion mechanism appear to be present in almost half of all prostate cancers and may be critical to the acquisition of metastatic potential of aggressive prostate cancers. Finally, altered DNA methylation patterns have been found in the majority of prostate cancers examined, suggesting widespread alterations in methylation-modulated gene expression. The presence of multiple changes in these tumors is consistent with the multistep nature of the transformation process. Finally, efforts to identify prostate cancer susceptibility loci are under way and may elucidate critical early events in prostatic carcinogenesis."
7596591	[Flow cytometric examinations of patients after radical surgery for prostatic cancer]	"Biological behavior of prostatic cancer is influenced by different tumor factors. The proliferative activity of the malignancies could be one of those parameters which serve as basis to design therapy and to estimate prognosis. Here ploidity and S-phase fraction of 44 prostatic cancer obtained by radical prostatectomy were compared to other known tumor characteristics (PSA, staging, grading). There are correlations between the PSA concentration, grading, staging and S phase fraction. The ploidity correlates with the grading. Neither of kinetic parameter correlated with the nodal involvement."
7604888	Heterogeneity in intratumor distribution of p53 mutations in human prostate cancer.	"Prostatic carcinoma from 65 patients have been examined for the occurrence of point mutations in the p53 tumor suppressor gene locus within the region of exons 5 to 8. Overall, only a small fraction of tumors (12.3%) was found to contain p53 mutations. No significant correlation was detected between the presence of the mutant gene and either tumor volume or histopathological grade. However, metastatic prostatic tumors are found to display a higher percentage (21.4%) of p53 mutations compared with primary adenocarcinomas (9.8%). Analysis of the topographical distribution of the p53 mutant genotype revealed two remarkable findings. First, multifocal tumors within a prostate appear to differ in harboring the mutant gene, and second, evidence is obtained for intratumor heterogeneity in the distribution of the mutant p53 allele. Together these findings appear to explain, at least in part, why there has been a wide discrepancy in the reported detection frequency of p53 mutations in prostate cancer specimens. It appears that the outcome of mutation analysis would depend not only on which tumors but also which regions of the tumors are included in the study. Furthermore, the observed heterogeneous topographical distribution of the mutation, if confirmed to be unique to prostate cancer, may have important implications in the understanding of the biology of prostate carcinogenesis."
7660512	Reversion of human prostate tumorigenic growth by azatyrosine.	"OBJECTIVES. Azatyrosine, an antibiotic isolated from a Streptomyces species, has been previously shown to have antitumor activity against ras- and neu-transformed fibroblasts and human epithelial cells. In this study, we investigated the effect of azatyrosine on human prostate cancer cell growth and the reversion potential of this antibiotic on prostate tumorigenic cell lines. METHODS. Three androgen-independent human prostate cancer cell lines (TSU-Prl, DU-145, and PC-3) were cultured in the presence of azatyrosine and their growth rates were determined over a 7-day period. Following exhaustive treatment with azatyrosine for 5 weeks, three azatyrosine-resistant colonies were cloned from the PC-3 cell line and were subsequently established as stable cell lines. The growth characteristics of these azatyrosine-resistant clones were examined both in vitro and in vivo to establish their ""potentially revertant"" profiles. RESULTS. Incubation with azatyrosine (for 7 days) resulted in greater than 95% in vitro growth inhibition of the three parental prostate cancer cell lines. Analysis of the biologic properties of these azatyrosine-resistant cell lines revealed: (1) a significant reduction in in vitro growth rates; (2) a decreased rate of DNA synthesis as measured by thymidine uptake; and (3) a decreased ability for colony formation in soft agar. Moreover all three azatyrosine-resistant clones exhibited suppressed tumorigenicity in severe combined immunodeficient (SCID) mice when compared with the parental cell line. An important observation was that one revertant clone demonstrated complete loss of tumorigenicity. On the basis of this biologic behavior, these cell lines were characterized as revertants. Cytogenetic analysis revealed gross chromosomal differences between the revertant clones and the parental cell line. Northern hybridization analysis demonstrated elevated expression of the K-rev-1 and bcl-2 but not the rrg mRNA transcripts in the revertant cell lines. CONCLUSIONS. These results suggest that azatyrosine inhibits prostate tumorigenic growth; it has a high reversion efficiency on human prostate cancer cells; and the K-rev-1 suppressor gene and the bcl-2 proto-oncogene could be potentially involved in the reversion mechanism mediated by azatyrosine. This reversion of prostate cancer cells to an apparently nontumorigenic phenotype points to a potentially significant therapeutic role for azatyrosine in the treatment of advanced prostate cancer."
7664288	Frequent loss of heterozygosity at 7q31.1 in primary prostate cancer is associated with tumor aggressiveness and progression.	"Cytogenetic analyses have demonstrated that chromosome region 7q22-32 is commonly altered in prostate adenocarcinomas. In addition, in recent fluorescence in situ hybridization studies, we have observed that aneusomy of chromosome 7 is frequent in prostate cancer and is associated with higher tumor grade, advanced pathological stage, and early prostate cancer death. These findings suggest that genetic alterations of chromosome 7 play a significant role in the development of prostate cancer. To better define the chromosome 7 alterations, PCR analysis of 21 microsatellite loci was performed on 54 paired prostate cancer and control DNAs. Overall, chromosome 7 allelic imbalance was identified in 16 of 54 cases (30%). Allelic imbalances of loci mapped to 7q were observed in 15 of the 16 cases. The allelic imbalances were classified as losses in 15 tumors (28%) and as gains in 1 (2%) by comparative multiplex PCR analysis. The most common site of allelic loss included loci D7S523 and D7S486 at 7q31.1. A comparison with clinicopathological features of the tested tumors revealed that the allelic loss of 7q31.1 correlated with higher tumor grade (P = 0.012) and lymph node metastasis (P = 0.017). These results indicate that 7q31 may be the site of a putative suppressor gene(s) important for the pathogenesis of prostate carcinoma, and that the genetic alterations at 7q31.1 may participate in tumor progression and metastasis."
7669562	Microsatellite instability in human prostate cancer.	"Microsatellite instability (MSI) was examined at 36 loci, and found in 9 (43%) of the 21 prostatic cancers. A loss of heterozygosity had occurred in five cases (24%). MSI did not correlate with clinical stage, but might play a role in the development of a subset of prostate cancers."
7675761	p53 immunoreactivity in primary and metastatic prostatic adenocarcinoma.	"p53 is a tumor suppressor protein that is overexpressed in a variety of human neoplasms, including prostatic adenocarcinoma. Recent studies have demonstrated a significant positive correlation between extent of p53 overexpression and tumor grade in prostatic adenocarcinoma. Because it appears that mutations of p53 might play a role in the pathogenesis of a subset of biologically aggressive prostatic neoplasms, we sought to examine the frequency of p53 overexpression in primary and metastatic prostatic adenocarcinoma. Using a monoclonal antibody (D07) directed against both the wild-type and mutant forms of p53, we examined p53 immunoreactivity in 36 cases of primary prostatic adenocarcinoma, 17 cases of metastatic prostatic adenocarcinoma involving lymph nodes and 15 cases of metastatic prostatic adenocarcinoma involving bone. Twenty-eight percent (10/36) of the primary tumors displayed nuclear staining for p53. Increased p53 immunoreactivity was observed in only 6% (1/16) of prostatic adenocarcinomas with a total Gleason score of 6 or less, as compared with 45% (9/20) of those adenocarcinomas with a Gleason score of 7 or more. Fifty-nine percent (10/17) of the lymph node metastases and 43% (6/14) of the bone metastases displayed nuclear immunoreactivity for p53. Our results indicate that increased p53 expression is positively correlated with increased histologic grade and with the presence of metastatic disease in patients with prostatic adenocarcinoma, and they suggest that mutations of the p53 gene may play a role in mediating the behavior of a biologically aggressive subset of this common neoplasm."
7678540	Mutational status of codons 12 and 13 of the N- and K-ras genes in tissue and cell lines derived from primary and metastatic prostate carcinomas.	"N- and K-ras mutations at codons 12 and 13 were investigated using oligonucleotide hybridization analysis after PCR amplification and subsequent sequence analysis of the amplified DNA from the region of interest in the following prostatic primary and metastatic (met) carcinoma-derived cell lines: 1013L (primary), PC3 (bone met), DU145 (brain met), and LNCaP (lymph node met). We also examined fresh and archival primary and metastatic prostate tumor tissue and benign prostatic hypertrophy specimens. All prostatic cells and tissues examined contain at least one wild-type N- and K-ras allele with respect to codons 12 and 13. No mutations were found at N-ras codon 13. The only mutation seen in the prostatic cell lines and tissues was a K-ras codon 12 position II G-to-T transversion. Since these are established nonclonal cell lines that have adapted to tissue culture, it is possible that this mutation does not represent the mutational state of prostatic carcinoma in vivo. However, the lack of consistent mutation in the ras genes amplified directly from tumors suggests that when ras mutations occur during the progression of prostatic carcinoma, they are late-stage events not directly involved in the initial development of disease. Immunoprecipitation studies using pan-ras antibodies revealed no evidence of altered expression of Ras proteins."
7689419	Homozygous deletion and frequent allelic loss of chromosome 8p22 loci in human prostate cancer.	"Allelic loss studies have been instrumental in identifying tumor suppressor gene loci in a variety of cancers. In this study we analyzed prostate cancer specimens from 52 patients for allelic loss using 8 polymorphic probes for the short arm of chromosome 8. Overall, 32 of 51 (63%) informative tumors showed loss of at least one locus on chromosome 8p. The most frequently deleted region is observed at chromosome 8p22-8p21.2. Loss of one allele is identified in 14 of 23 (61%) tumors at D8S163, in 15 of 32 (47%) tumors at lipoprotein lipase, and in 20 of 29 (69%) tumors at MSR, all on 8p22. Loss of one allele is identified in 16 of 27 (59%) tumors at D8S220 at 8p21.3-8p21.2. In addition to frequent loss of one allele at the MSR locus, one metastatic prostate cancer sample demonstrated homozygous deletion of MSR sequences. Loci telomeric and centromeric to this region are largely retained. A chromosome 8p deletion map is constructed and defines the smallest region of overlap to a 14-cM interval at 8p22 between D8S163 and lipoprotein lipase, flanking the MSR locus. Evidence of chromosome 8q multiplication at locus D8S39 was detected in 5 of 32 (16%) tumors, all of which demonstrated loss with at least one probe on chromosome 8p. This study extends the previous finding of frequent loss of chromosome 8p in prostate cancer by defining a common region of loss of heterozygosity at 8p22 and a homozygous deletion of the MSR locus contained within this region. This is the first homozygous deletion identified in the genome of a human prostate cancer and the highest rate of loss yet reported on chromosome 8p in cancer. These results strongly suggest the presence of a tumor suppressor gene in this region which is frequently inactivated in prostate cancer."
7691145	Infrequent involvement of p53 gene mutations in the tumourigenesis of Japanese prostate cancer.	A study was made of the incidence of p53 mutations in Japanese males with prostate cancer or benign prostatic hyperplasia. Polymerase chain reaction single-strand conformation polymorphism (PCR-SSCP) was used as a primary screening technique with gene sequencing being carried out in positive cases. Two out of 21 prostate cancers (9.5%) were found to have p53 mutations. These were stage B2 and D2 prostate cancers. No abnormalities were found in the remaining cases or benign prostatic hyperplasia. Mutations of the p53 gene would thus appear infrequent in the tumourigenesis of primary prostate cancer.
7757995	Genomic instability of microsatellite repeats in prostate cancer: relationship to clinicopathological variables.	"Sixty-six patients with prostatic adenocarcinoma were screened for somatic instability at 8 microsatellite marker loci on 5 chromosomes. Differences in unrelated microsatellites for tumor and normal DNA were detected in 13 (19.7%) patients. Only extraglandular spread (nodal involvement and distant metastasis) was found to show significant association with somatic instability after controlling for other clinicopathological variables (P < 0.05). Microsatellite instability may possibly occur during the early stages of neoplastic transformation in a subset of prostate cancer rather than as a late event. This may be related to a phenotype with growth advantage. The frequency of this mutator phenotype is much higher in the United States than Japan, reflecting racial differences in the molecular tumorigenesis of this malignancy."
7770997	Androgen receptor alterations in patients with disturbances in male sexual development and in prostatic carcinoma.	"The androgen receptor, a ligand-activated nuclear transcription factor belonging to the large superfamily of nuclear receptors, mediates the intracellular action of androgens. It plays a central role in male sexual development and in prostatic carcinoma as a target of endocrine therapy. We have looked for androgen receptor mutations as a cause of male sexual ambiguity and as a possible reason for failure of androgen ablation therapy on prostatic carcinoma. In 5 patients of 2 families with perineoscrotal hypospadia and undescended testes, we have identified a mutation ala596-->thr in the DNA-binding domain of the androgen receptor. This mutation interferes with DNA binding of the receptor. Reactivation of this mutant receptor by binding of an antibody or by interaction with other proteins and by exchange of the amino acid thr602-->ala indicates that the dimerization step is affected. A point mutation ser703-->gly was detected in a newborn male child with perineoscrotal hypospadias. This mutation decreased receptor-hormone affinity. As a consequence its transactivation activity was dependent on the androgen concentration. Although the molecular mechanisms of these two mutations are completely different, both resulted in partial androgen insensitivity and interfered with virilization in the affected patients. A different kind of mutation was present in a tumor specimen derived from an advanced therapy-resistant prostatic carcinoma. This point mutation resulted in exchange of valine-->methionine at amino acid position 715 in the receptor protein. In contrast to the former two mutations this receptor showed a gain in function.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)"
7772739	Measurement of ras p21 in the urine of patients with urological tumours.	"We have measured the product of the ras oncogene, ras p21, in random un-timed urine samples using an immunoblotting method which relies upon enhanced chemiluminescence for visualisation of the nitrocellulose filter. Urine samples were analysed from groups of patients with prostate (n = 10) or bladder (n = 25) cancer and a control group (n = 30) with no apparent urological disease. The mean concentration of urinary ras p21 in the groups with either bladder or prostate cancer was not significantly higher than that of the control group. The most striking difference between the control and clinical groups was the presence of a previously un-reported ras p21 ""doublet"" in the electrophoretic patterns obtained from 20% of the bladder cancer group and 10% of the prostate cancer group. This doublet was not present in any of the control samples analysed. This doublet is strongly suggestive of a mutation within the ras oncogene."
7795646	In vivo amplification of the androgen receptor gene and progression of human prostate cancer.	"Overexpression of amplified genes is often associated with the acquisition of resistance to cancer therapeutic agents in vitro. We have identified a similar molecular mechanism in vivo for endocrine treatment failure in human prostate cancer which involves amplification of the androgen receptor (AR) gene. Comparative genomic hybridization shows that amplification of the Xq11-q13 region (the location), is common in tumours recurring during androgen deprivation therapy. We found high-level AR amplification in seven of 23 (30%) recurrent tumours, but in none of the specimens taken from the same patients prior to therapy. Our results suggest that AR amplification emerges during androgen deprivation therapy by facilitating tumour cell growth in low androgen concentrations."
7823594	Tumor suppressor genes in prostatic oncogenesis.	"Mutations of tumor suppressor genes are critical genetic alterations occurring during the genesis and progression of human cancer, and consequently are candidates for use as surrogate endpoint biomarkers. The two most intensively studied suppressor genes, retinoblastoma (Rb) and p53, are mutated in approximately 20-50% of advanced-stage prostate cancers, but only rarely in early tumors. The precise DNA base changes, especially those affecting p53, may yield clues to relevant carcinogenic mechanisms. Increased expression of p53 in neoplastic cells, as detected by immunohistochemistry, may indicate mutation or a physiological response to DNA damage. Allelic losses of chromosome arms 8p and 16q are relatively common even in early prostate cancers. Quantitative measurement of allelic imbalance can be performed in preneoplastic or small neoplastic lesions, albeit with some technical challenge. The significance of whole-genome or regional allelic imbalance at various stages of prostatic oncogenesis has not been established."
7898920	Microsatellite instability in prostate cancer.	"Assessment of the genetic instability of a microsatellite has indicated a new mechanism in human carcinogenesis. Examination was made to determine whether microsatellite instability is associated with the onset of prostate cancer. Twenty-nine DNA samples from 24 primary prostate cancer, two metastatic lymph-node and three benign prostatic hypertrophy patients were used. Differences in unrelated microsatellites for tumor and normal DNA were detected in nine of 24 (37.5%) cases. Seven of 11 (63.6%) with poorly differentiated adenocarcinomas and seven of 15 (46.7%) stage D metastatic patients showed somatic instability in a number of microsatellites. Statistically significant differences in well to moderately differentiated tumors and poorly differentiated cancer (P = 0.015, Chi-square test), were detected but not for stages A-C and D (P = 0.2311). Genetic alterations would thus appear to be rare in low grade and/or early prostate cancers but more common in high grade and/or advanced prostate cancers."
7928631	State of adenomatous polyposis coli gene and ras oncogenes in Japanese prostate cancer.	"Genetic alterations of ras oncogenes (K-, H- and N-ras) and adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene in tissues of prostate cancer from Japanese patients were examined using PCR-SSCP (polymerase chain reaction-single strand conformation polymorphism) analysis and direct sequencing. Tissues from 8 cases of untreated stage B prostate cancer surgically removed and from 10 cases of endocrine therapy-resistant metastatic disease obtained at autopsy were used in the present study. In four out of 18 cases (22%), ras point mutations were found, two in either codon 12 or 61 of K-ras and two in either 13 or 61 of H-ras. These point mutations were detected in one of the stage B cases (13%) and in three of the autopsy cases (30%). All these cases were poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma. In autopsy cases showing ras mutation in cancerous prostate, the same alteration was observed in metastatic tissues. No APC gene mutation was detected in any sample, although polymorphism was found in some cases. These results indicate that ras oncogene mutations are related to the progression of prostate cancer, whereas APC gene alteration is not involved in tumorigenesis and development of this cancer."
7960236	Oncogene amplifications in early-stage human prostate carcinomas.	"Oncogene amplifications are frequently found in solid tumours and are often associated with more aggressively growing forms of human cancer. The proto-oncogenes c-myc, c-erbB2/neu and the 11q13 band are the most frequently amplified regions in adenocarcinomas of various origins. The present study was undertaken to define whether c-myc, int2/FGF3 (11q13 region) and c-erbB2/neu genes are involved in prostate tumorigenesis. Tumours and peripheral lymphocyte DNA from 21 localized early-stage prostatic carcinomas were analysed by Southern-blot electrophoresis for amplification of the c-myc and c-erbB2/neu genes and the 11q13 region (int2/FGF3). We detected no amplification of these 3 oncogenes in our panel."
7971517	Androgen receptor alterations in prostatic carcinoma.	"Intracellular action of androgens is mediated by the androgen receptor (AR), which is a key element of the androgen signal transduction cascade and a target of endocrine therapy for prostatic carcinoma. Therefore, the qualitative and quantitative alterations of AR expression in prostatic carcinomas and their possible implications for tumor progression and treatment are of great interest. Findings in prostatic tumor cell lines of rat and human origin suggest a reduction of AR protein expression accompanied by an increase in tumor malignancy. However, immunohistochemical studies and binding assays demonstrated presence of ARs in all histological types of prostatic tumors, in therapy-responsive as well as in therapy-unresponsive ones. AR content of prostatic tumor specimens did not correlate with outcome of endocrine therapy of advanced prostatic carcinoma in these studies. Solely the degree of heterogeneity of AR expression may be useful as an indicator of responsiveness to therapy. AR mutations have been detected in the LNCaP cell line and in three primary prostatic tumor specimens. Three of them are point mutations in the hormone-binding domain of the AR, the fourth mutation is a CAG-microsatellite depression in the N-terminus. Evidence coming from studies on AR in prostatic cancer highlights the possibility that AR structural alterations may have significance in tumor progression."
8052266	The mouse androgen receptor is suppressed by the 5'-untranslated region of the gene.	"The androgen receptor (AR) mediates the biological functions of androgens and is essential for normal growth and differentiation of urogenital organs as well as initiation and maintenance of spermatogenesis. Withdrawal of androgens by castration or other methods has been shown to cause a marked, although often temporary, regression of many prostate cancers. In order to gain a better understanding of the transcriptional regulation of the AR, a series of truncation mutants derived from the 5'-region of the mouse AR (mAR) were inserted into the promoter-less plasmid pBLCAT3 and transiently expressed in the mouse alpha T3-1 and GT1-7 cell lines. The results of these experiments indicate the presence of a negative regulatory element in the 5'-untranslated region of the gene, which is able to reduce chloramphenicol acetyltransferase (CAT) activity by 77-89%. We have named this element the mAR suppressor (mARS). DNase-I protection assays of the 5'-untranslated region disclosed a protected domain. Gel mobility assays using the mARS revealed the presence of three protein-DNA complexes that could specifically bind to this protected domain. Insertion of the mARS into the thymidine kinase promoter containing pBLCAT2 vector resulted in a 2- to 10-fold decrease in CAT activity, but only if the insert was 3' to the start of transcription initiation. Finally, point mutations within the mARS were able to increase transcription of the AR promoter by 2.3-fold. The results of these experiments indicate that the mAR 5'-untranslated region contains a suppressor element.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)"
8143277	Double minute chromosomes in an invasive adenocarcinoma of the prostate.	"Cytogenetic analysis of an uncultured, primary and invasive adenocarcinoma of the prostate showed several clonal abnormalities in a hyperdiploid karyotype, including double minute (dmin) chromosomes. The latter, although sporadic in this type of tumor, were previously reported in two cases of invasive prostatic cancer. This anomaly may therefore be associated with increased malignant properties."
8145761	Mutant androgen receptor detected in an advanced-stage prostatic carcinoma is activated by adrenal androgens and progesterone.	"Structural changes of the androgen receptor (AR) may contribute to the development of resistance to endocrine therapy in prostatic carcinoma. We have isolated AR cDNA fragments from seven tumor specimens derived from patients with advanced metastatic prostatic tumors. In one specimen obtained from a patient who failed to respond to endocrine and cytotoxic therapy we have detected a point mutation in the hormone-binding domain of the receptor. This AR mutation is a guanine-to-adenine transition at nucleotide 2671 that leads to substitution of methionine for the wild type valine at position 715. It is a somatic mutation because it was not present in the AR genomic DNA fragments isolated from prostatic and testicular tissues of the same patient. The mutant AR was recreated in an expression vector and transiently expressed in COS-7 and CV-1 cells. Hormone-binding assays revealed that the mutant receptor does not differ from the wild type receptor in its ability to bind androgen. The dissociation constant for the synthetic androgen mibolerone was 3 nM for both receptors. There was also no significant difference in binding of other steroids and nonsteroidal antiandrogens as revealed by competition binding assays. However, transfection experiments to determine the trans-activation potential of the mutant receptor produced differences in the action of this receptor compared to the wild type receptor. Dihydrotestosterone and the synthetic androgens methyltrienolone (R1881) and mibolerone were equally proficient in conferring trans-activation activity to both the mutant and wild type receptors. Adrenal androgens such as dehydroepiandrosterone and androstenedione, as well as progesterone mediated a higher trans-activation through the mutant than through the wild type receptor. These data demonstrate that the exchange of a single valine into methionine at position 715 in the AR promoters trans-activation not only by testicular but also by adrenal androgens and progesterone. This pattern of ligand-dependent trans-activation may have significance in the process controlling the progression of prostatic carcinoma."
8187060	DNA polymerase beta gene mutation in human prostate cancer.	"DNA polymerase beta is a nuclear protein essential to DNA repair in mammalian cells. A high frequency of mutations in this gene has been reported in colorectal cancers. To clarify the tumorigenesis steps of human prostate cancers in the molecular basis, we examined the entire coding region of the human DNA polymerase beta gene in human prostate cancer tissues using polymerase chain reaction, single-strand conformational polymorphism analysis of RNA, and sequencing analysis. Consequently, we detected DNA polymerase beta gene mutations in 2 of 12 cases (17%). The first case is an A to G transition at nucleotide 893, resulting in a substitution of the amino acid from tyrosine to cysteine. In the second case, we found an A to G transition at nucleotide 305, a T deletion at nucleotide 569, and an A insertion into the 6 repeats of A from nucleotide 612 to 617. This T deletion shifted the subsequent reading frame and resulted in the premature termination at codon 163 instead of 336. The two cases were advanced grade and stage. Present results suggest that polymerase beta gene mutations, although they occurred at relatively low frequency, are involved in certain cases of human prostate carcinogenesis."
8291601	"Deletion mapping of chromosome 8p in colorectal carcinoma and dysplasia arising in ulcerative colitis, prostatic carcinoma, and malignant fibrous histiocytomas."	"Short tandem repeat polymorphism markers on the short arm of chromosome 8 were used to search for loss of heterozygosity (LOH) in colorectal carcinoma and dysplasia complicating ulcerative colitis, in prostatic carcinoma, and in malignant fibrous histiocytoma (MFH). Fifty percent of prostatic carcinomas (13/26), 44% of carcinomas or dysplasias arising in ulcerative colitis (7/16), and 30% (4/12) of MFH cases showed LOH for markers on 8p. Detailed mapping demonstrated variability in the size of the chromosomal region showing LOH; however, the data suggest a common 30-centimorgan region of LOH on chromosome 8p between the LPL locus and pter in colorectal and prostatic cancers. In addition, LOH was observed on 8p in both high-grade and low-grade dysplasia in ulcerative colitis, indicating that LOH on 8p may occur at an early stage of neoplastic development in this disorder. In contrast, MFH cases exhibited LOH for marker D8S87, which has been identified as being near the putative Werner's syndrome locus. These results suggest that a tumor suppressor gene, located on the distal portion of chromosome 8p, exists in common for prostatic and colorectal carcinomas, and a second tumor suppressor gene may exist linked to the Werner's syndrome locus."
8297812	[Mechanism of loss of androgen dependency in androgen-dependent tumor]	"Human prostatic cancer is androgen sensitive tumor but gradually loses its androgen sensitivity during progression. Amount of androgen receptors usually correlates with androgen sensitivity. Mutation of androgen receptor gene is attributable to be one reason for androgen insensitivity. Alternatively, it is shown that a murine androgen insensitive tumor derived from androgen dependent one possesses functional androgen receptors without structural abnormality. A series of gene mutation, especially with relation to genes encoding growth factors, may be an important change for progression from androgen sensitive tumor to insensitive one."
8314337	Frequency and characterization of p53 mutations in primary and metastatic human prostate cancer.	"We have studied the frequency of mutations in the p53 gene in human prostate cancer. The investigated material consisted of 20 primary-tumor tissue specimens, obtained by transurethral resection and tissue specimens of 15 lymph-node metastases, obtained at total prostatectomy. The applied methods encompassed immunohistochemistry on frozen sections, using the monoclonal antibody PAb 1801, and single-strand conformation polymorphism (SSCP) analysis, after amplification of single exon sequences by PCR, on exons 5 to 8 of the p53 gene. The mutations, leading to aberrantly migrating bands in the PCR-SSCP analysis, were identified by direct sequencing of the PCR product. Immunohistochemical and PCR-SSCP analysis were completely confirmative. In the primary tumors, mutations were found in 10% of the specimens (codons 232 and 273), and in lymph-node metastases in 15% of the specimens (codons 248 and 273). In one case (codon 273), the same mutation was found both in the primary tumor and in the lymph-node metastasis. Our results show that p53 mutations are infrequent in both primary and metastatic prostate tumors. In addition, they indicate that there is no strict correlation between p53 mutation and tumor metastasis."
8345722	[Detection of numerical chromosome aberrations in urologic malignancies using in situ hybridization from formarin-fixed paraffin sections]	"It has been shown that molecular cytogenetics in interphase nuclei is applicable to paraffin embedded sections from formarin-fixed materials utilizing in situ hybridization (ISH). This allows precise identification of numerical abnormalities of chromosome in tumor cells without disruption of tumor morphology. Thirteen cases of bladder cancer and twenty six cases of prostate adenocarcinoma were evaluated for numerical aberrations of chromosome 1, 7, 10, 11, 17, 18, X and Y utilizing biotinylated probes specific for the alpha satellite region. In two cases from total prostatectomy, one case from total cystectomy and two cases from TUR-P specimen, hybridized chromosomes could not be detected in individual tumor cells. With respect to the appearance of the ISH signal, optical concentration and time for the digestion enzyme has to be established essentially. This technique can now be applied on the detection of biological activity in various types of urological cancer."
8347255	Comparison of DNA content in primary and lymph node metastases in prostate adenocarcinoma.	"There is increasing evidence that nuclear DNA content has significant prognostic value for adenocarcinoma of the prostate. There also appear to be considerable differences in cellular DNA content between patient cohorts when primary tumor or pelvic lymph node metastases are measured. In addition, prostate adenocarcinoma is heterogeneous in DNA measurements; that adds confusion to studies incorporating fine needle aspiration biopsy samples. We compared cellular DNA content in 34 patients with available needle biopsies and pelvic lymph node metastases. Four groups of patients were identified: diploid-range primaries and metastases (8 patients), diploid-range primaries and aneuploid metastases (13), aneuploid primaries and metastases (10), and aneuploid primaries and diploid-range metastases (2). Patients with diploid-range primary tumors had a longer interval to progression and death than did patients with aneuploid primary tumors, although neither was significant in this small series. Patients with diploid-range lymph node metastasis had a longer interval to progression (P = .04) and survival (P = .09) than did individuals with aneuploid metastases. We conclude that the cellular DNA content of prostate cancer metastases in this series of stage D1 patients was more powerful in predicting time to progression and ultimate survival than evaluation of needle biopsy specimens of the primary cancer."
8374904	Defining the extent and nature of cytogenetic events in prostatic adenocarcinoma: paraffin FISH vs. metaphase analysis.	"A comparative study of primary prostatic tumors utilizing conventional metaphase analysis of prostate tumor cultures and fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) analysis of paraffin-embedded tissue sections revealed significant differences in type and extent of cytogenetic aberrations. Clonal trisomy 7 was identified in two tumors by metaphase analysis of prostate cultures, but not confirmed in either case by FISH analysis. True gain of chromosome 8 was revealed by FISH analysis in malignant epithelium of four tumors but not in adjacent normal or hyperplastic glands. Neither gain nor loss of this chromosome was observed by metaphase analysis in any of the tumors. Significant monosomy and nullisomy of chromosome 10 was identified in one case by FISH, but no cells with gain or loss of chromosome 10 were observed by metaphase analysis. Significant loss of the Y chromosome was revealed in one tumor by FISH, but no cells with -Y were identified by metaphase analysis. Clonal loss of the Y chromosome was identified in two other tumors by metaphase analysis. Paraffin FISH analysis of these tumors revealed overall monosomy in both, although in one tumor there was extensive nodular loss of the Y chromosome. Paraffin FISH analysis permits identification of cytogenetic aberrations in areas identified as carcinoma (CaP), prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia (PIN), and benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH). This technique appears more informative in defining the true extent and nature of cytogenetic aberrations in prostate cancer than metaphase analysis of prostate tumor cultures."
8467459	DNA heterogeneity in prostatic adenocarcinoma. A DNA flow cytometric mapping study with whole organ sections of prostate.	"BACKGROUND. The degree of DNA heterogeneity varies between tumors arising at different sites. The presence of a significant degree of variability within a given tumor may result in problems in the interpretation of DNA flow cytometric findings. This study evaluated the degree of DNA heterogeneity in prostatic adenocarcinoma. METHODS. A total of 122 3-mm punch biopsy specimens were evaluated from single representative whole organ sections from nine cases of prostate cancer (range, 4-18 samples per case; mean, 12 samples; median, 14 samples). Individual punch biopsy specimens were graded and reviewed to confirm the presence of carcinoma and processed for DNA ploidy analysis. RESULTS. Assessable histograms, defined as having a coefficient of variation of the diploid G0/G1 peak of 7.5% or less, were available for 111 (91%) of the samples. Of the nine cases studied, five (56%) showed heterogeneity in the DNA pattern (diploid plus aneuploid, n = 1; diploid plus tetraploid, n = 2; and diploid plus tetraploid plus aneuploid, n = 2). All four cases having a homogeneous DNA content were DNA diploid in all samples. In those cases with a heterogeneous pattern, the areas having abnormal DNA patterns could not be predicted by histologic pattern or grade. CONCLUSIONS. From this study, the authors conclude that a significant degree of DNA heterogeneity exists within individual cases of prostatic adenocarcinoma, and this may be an important confounding factor in DNA ploidy studies."
8628719	Low incidence of androgen receptor gene mutations in human prostatic tumors using single strand conformation polymorphism analysis.	"It is possible that structural changes of the androgen receptor (AR) contribute to the insensitivity of prostatic carcinomas to endocrine therapy. We have isolated DNA from 58 human prostate tumor specimens (31 carcinomas pretreatment, 13 carcinomas after relapse to hormonal therapy, and 14 benign prostatic hyperplasia), three established human prostate carcinoma cell lines and two transplantable human prostatic carcinoma xenografts. Twelve pairs of oligonucleotide primers were used to amplify the majority of the coding region of the AR gene and the products screened for mutations using single-strand conformation polymorphism (SSCP) techniques. In one tumor sample a cytosine to guanine transition in exon F which leads to substitution of glutamic acid for the wild type glutamine at position 798 of the ligand binding domain was detected. The same mutation was also found in the patient's genomic DNA and as been described in a patient with partial androgen insensitivity syndrome. Intronic mutations were detected in two of the benign prostatic hyperplasia samples, and a silent mutation at nucleotide 995 was found to be present in eight poorly differentiated carcinomas, one BPH specimen, as well as in the cell line DU145 (18% of the samples studied). In agreement with most of the literature, these studies indicate that AR mutations are rare both prior to therapy and even in androgen relapsed tumors."
8630228	"DNA methylation, molecular genetic, and linkage studies in prostate cancer."	"Molecular biologic studies have now identified a number of important genetic and epigenetic mechanisms that cause alterations in growth and differentiation genes in prostate cancer. In addition to DNA deletion and point mutation, DNA methylation represents a new paradigm for the inactivation of tumor suppressor or growth suppressor genes. The identification of new genes, including a prostate cancer susceptibility locus, may furnish further insight into the molecular characteristics of prostate cancer and permit the early identification of affected individuals."
8630238	Provocative aspects of androgen genetics.	"Androgens play a key role in prostate structure and function, leading to the hypothesis that effects of the hormone are an important component in the development of prostatic disease. Differences in serum testosterone levels and 5alpha-reductase activities between ethnic and racial groups have been implicated in the variable incidence of prostate cancer among certain populations. Androgen receptors transduce the steroid signal within cells, but attempts to correlate differences in receptor levels with prostatic disease have been unsuccessful. However, molecular studies of androgen receptor gene structure have recently provided new insights toward defining a genetic basis for the pathology associated with three diseases--spinal bulbar muscular atrophy, breast carcinoma, and prostate cancer--affecting middle-aged and older men. In summary, epidemiologic data on androgen biosynthesis, metabolism, and action of androgens and molecular genetic analysis of gene structure have led to a new understanding of the interrelationships between environmental and genetic factors that may impact on the incidence of certain pathologic conditions in men."
8631004	The t(6;16)(p21;q22) chromosome translocation in the LNCaP prostate carcinoma cell line results in a tpc/hpr fusion gene.	"Very little is known about the molecular and genetic mechanisms involved in prostate cancer. Previous studies have shown frequent loss of heterozygosity (40%) at chromosomal regions 8p, 10q, and 16q, suggesting the presence of tumor suppressor genes in these regions. The LNCaP cell line, established from a metastatic lesion of human prostatic adenocarcinoma, carries a t(6;16)(p21;q22) translocation. To determine whether this translocation involved genes important in the process of malignant transformation, we cloned and sequenced the t(6;16) breakpoint of this cell line. Sequence analysis showed that the breakpoint is within the haptoglobin gene cluster on chromosome 16, and that, on chromosome 6, the break occurs within a novel gene, tpc, similar to the prokaryotic S10 ribosomal protein gene. The translocation results in the production of a fusion transcript, tpc/hpr."
8640720	Cytogenetic abnormalities are frequent in uncultured prostate cancer cells.	"Despite attempts by several laboratories to identify consistent chromosome abnormalities in cancer of the prostate, relatively few clonal changes have been found. We compared analysis of metaphases from uncultured specimens of primary prostate cancer (direct preparations) with those obtained from short-term culture using various media. While the number of metaphases in uncultured specimens was low, and chromosome morphology fair to poor, structural chromosome changes could be identified as clonal in 5 of 14 specimens (36%). In contrast, while clonal abnormalities were found in 20 of 61 (33%) specimens analyzed after short-term culture, these abnormalities were predominantly numerical and simple structural changes. Two tumors metastatic to lymph nodes were studied using direct preparations; both were near tetraploid, with multiple structural abnormalities, including isochromosome 8q in both and del(8)(p21) in one. Cytogenetic analyses of metastatic prostate tumors have been very limited, and these data suggest that formation of an i(8q) may be the mechanism by which loss of heterozygosity of 8p, reported frequently in molecular analyses, occurs. Our findings indicate that prostate cancers, like most solid tumors, do have clonal chromosome abnormalities that are frequently complex, but the method that reproducibly yields representative karyotypes from this particular tumor remains to be identified."
8650073	Selection toward diploid cells in prostatic carcinoma derived cell cultures.	"For elucidation of the growth-regulatory mechanisms in prostatic carcinoma, in vitro investigations on prostatic cell cultures are required. However, one major problem of cell culturing is the selection of particular cell types such that the cell lines representing only some of the features as compared with the tumor of origin. We studied the chromosomal composition of 20 prostatic tissue-derived cell cultures and 12 original (fresh) tissue specimens that were obtained from 13 patients with prostatic adenocarcinoma. Using fluorescence in situ DNA hybridization (FISH), evident clonal abnormalities were detected in 78% of the fresh cancer samples and in 47% of the cultured cancer samples. Of the seven cases revealing clonal abnormalities in the fresh cancer specimen, aneuploidy was detected in only two samples after cell culturing at the earliest passage studied. The aneuploid cell populations in the cultured samples were all lost during progressive subcultivation (after passage 4). Interestingly, by performing FISH on cytogenetic preparations aneuploidy was confined to the interphases, with the metaphases being found to be diploid. This finding indicates that the aneuploid cells have a proliferation disadvantage in cell culture resulting in an overgrowth of diploid cells."
8661103	Physical mapping of chromosome 8p22 markers and their homozygous deletion in a metastatic prostate cancer.	"Numerous studies have implicated the short arm of chromosome 8 as the site of one or more tumor suppressor genes inactivated in carcinogenesis of the prostate, colon, lung, and liver. Previously, we identified a homozygous deletion on chromosome 8p22 in a metastatic prostate cancer. To map this homozygous deletion physically, long-range restriction mapping was performed using yeast artificial chromosomes (YACs) spanning approximately 2 Mb of chromosome band 8p22. Subcloned genomic DNA and cDNA probes isolated by hybrid capture from these YACs were mapped in relation to one another, reinforcing map integrity. Mapped single-copy probes from the region were then applied to DNA isolated from a metastatic prostate cancer containing a chromosome 8p22 homozygous deletion and indicated that its deletion spans 730-970 kb. Candidate genes PRLTS (PDGF-receptor beta-like tumor suppressor) and CTSB (cathepsin B) are located outside the region of homozygous deletion. Gnthon marker D8S549 is located approximately at the center of this region of homozygous deletion. Two new microsatellite polymorphisms, D8S1991 and D8S1992, also located within the region of homozygous deletion on chromosome 8p22, are described. Physical mapping places cosmid CI8-2644 telomeric to MSR (macrophage scavenger receptor), the reverse of a previously published map, altering the interpretation of published deletion studies. This work should prove helpful in the identification of candidate tumor suppressor genes in this region."
8661104	Structure and methylation-associated silencing of a gene within a homozygously deleted region of human chromosome band 8p22.	"The structure and expression pattern of a human gene located within a homozygously deleted region of a metastatic prostate cancer have been characterized. Multiple cDNA fragments of this gene were isolated by hybrid capture with yeast artificial chromosome clones covering the deletion region. Eleven coding exons spanned 205-220 kb of the 730- to 970-kb deletion. The predicted amino acid sequence was 43% identical to that of an anonymous Caenorhabditis elegans gene and 20% identical to an accessory or regulatory subunit of the oligosaccharyltransferase enzyme complex in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Hydrophobicity profiles of all three gene products were similar and showed four putative membrane-spanning domains in the molecules' C-terminal halves, suggesting a general conservation of function. The gene was expressed as an approximately 1.5-kb mRNA in most nonlymphoid human cells/tissues including prostate, lung, liver, and colon. Expression was detected in many epithelial tumor cell lines, but was undetectable by Northern blot or RT-PCR in 14 of 15 colorectal, 1 of 8 lung, and 1 of 4 liver cancer cell lines. Lack of expression in tumor cell lines was highly correlated with hypermethylation of a CpG island located at the gene's 5' end. These findings form a basis for further work on this candidate tumor suppressor gene."
8674067	Genetic alterations in untreated metastases and androgen-independent prostate cancer detected by comparative genomic hybridization and allelotyping.	"A newly developed method of comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) employing quantitative statistical comparisons was applied to DNA from two different types of advanced prostate cancer tissue. Multiple CGH analyses were obtained for each chromosome in each tumor, and the results of point-by-point comparison of the mean tumor:normal color ratio to a control normal:normal color ratio in each of 1247 evenly distributed data channels constituting the entire human genome were interpreted as loss, gain, or no change in copy number in the tumor genome. Group I tissue was obtained from prostate cancer metastases from 20 patients, 19 of whom had received no prior prostate cancer treatment. This DNA also was analyzed by Southern and microsatellite allelotyping at 53 different loci on 20 different chromosome arms. CGH results agreed with allelotyping results at 92% of the informative loci studied. These samples, which contained highly enriched tumor DNA, showed the highest rates of alteration yet reported in several chromosomal regions known to be altered frequently in prostate cancer: 8q gain (85%), 8p loss (80%), 13q loss (75%), 16q loss (55%), 17p loss (50%), and 10q loss (50%). Group II tissue was obtained predominately from primary or recurrent tumor from 11 patients who had been treated with long-term androgen-deprivation therapy and developed androgen-independent metastatic disease. Quantitative CGH analysis on DNA from these tissues showed chromosomal alterations that were very similar to those found in group I, suggesting that untreated metastatic tumors contain the bulk of chromosomal alterations necessary for recurrence to occur during androgen deprivation. In the entire data set, a number of previously undetected regions of frequent loss or gain were identified, including losses of chromosomes 2q (42%), 5q (39%), 6q (39%), and 15q (39%) and gains of chromosomes 11p (52%), 1q (52%), 3q (52%), and 2p (45%). Chi-squared analysis showed a significantly higher frequency of gain of the 4q25-q28 region in tumors from African-American patients, indicating a possible oncogene whose activation may play a role in the higher rate of progression seen in this ethnic group. Additional study of these frequently altered regions may provide insight into the mechanism of prostate cancer progression and lead to important tools for tumor-specific prognosis and therapy."
8679444	p16 mutations/deletions are not frequent events in prostate cancer.	"Cyclin-dependent kinase-4 inhibitor gene (p16INK4) has recently been mapped to chromosome 9p21. Homozygous deletions of this gene have been found at high frequency in cell lines derived from different types of tumours. These findings suggested therefore, that p16INK4 is a tumour-suppressor gene involved in a wide variety of human cancers. To investigate the frequency of p16INK mutations/deletions in prostate cancer, we screened 20 primary prostate tumours and four established cell lines by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and single-strand conformation polymorphism (SSCP) analysis for exon 1 and exon 2. In contrast to most previous reports, no homozygous deletions were found in prostate cancer cell lines, but one cell line (DU145) has revealed to a mutation at codon 76. Only two SSCP shifts were detected in primary tumours: one of them corresponds to a mutation at codon 55 and the other one probably corresponds to a polymorphism. These data suggest that mutation of the p16INK4 gene is not a frequent genetic alteration implicated in prostate cancer development."
8726595	The mutated androgen receptor and its implications for the treatment of metastatic carcinoma of the prostate.	"Androgen deprivation is the most effective therapy for patients with advanced prostatic carcinoma. The lack of androgen stimulation on these cells causes them to become apoptotic. Although therapeutic efficacy of initial androgen deprivation in prostate cancer is high, the emergence of androgen-independent cancer is inevitable. Withdrawal of the antiandrogen flutamide elicits surprising activity in these cancers. In numerous studies the response rates cell line harbors a mutation in codon 877 of the androgen receptor. The mutant receptor loses androgen specificity and is activated by various steroids as well as flutamide. Identical and similar mutations have now been isolated from human prostate cancer tissue. The discovery of the mutated androgen receptor sheds light on the emergence of androgen-independent cancer and should facilitate the development of more efficacious therapies."
8769716	Point mutation of the p53 gene is an infrequent event in untreated prostate cancer.	"The p53 gene is known to be one of the frequently altered tumor suppressor genes, involved in the oncogenesis of a wide spectrum of human malignant tumors. We investigated mutational events of the p53 gene in 18 clinically untreated prostate cancers. Direct sequencing analysis demonstrated that 1 of 18 cases harbored point mutation in the highly conserved transcript region. The case showed CAT at codon 273 instead of wild-type CGT, substituting the encoded amino acid form histidine to arginine. The case had previously revealed homozygous loci on 17p, including the p53 locus, by restriction fragment length polymorphism analysis. The other 17 cases harbored neither mutation nor small deletion. It is concluded that point mutation of the p53 gene is a infrequent event in the oncogenesis of untreated prostate cancer."
8777735	Interphase in situ hybridization to disaggregated and intact tissue specimens of prostatic adenocarcinomas.	"A comparative study was performed of interphase in situ hybridization (ISH) to deparaffinized 4-microns tissue sections and nuclear suspensions from eight prostatic adenocarcinomas, as well as one normal prostatic control. Whole nuclear suspensions were derived from the same tumor areas to evaluate differences of ISH to truncated versus whole nuclei. DNA probes specific for the centromeres of chromosome 1, 7, 8, 10, and Y were used for detection of numerical chromosomal changes and aneuploidy. In six adenocarcinomas chromosome aberrations (+7, +8, -8, -10, -Y) were seen. However, ISH to sections revealed focal aberrations (-10, -Y) in four cases that could not be distinguished in the suspensions. Chromosomal alterations occurring in larger tumor areas were also detected in the nuclear suspensions. Chromosome copy number changes, especially gains, were better discriminated in the nuclear suspensions. The rate of ISH aneuploidy seen in nuclear suspensions corresponded with that observed in the tissue sections (P < 0.01). Ploidy patterns as assessed by ISH to sections and nuclear suspensions were in concordance with DNA flow cytometry (both P < 0.001). We conclude that both section and suspension ISH were able to accurately detect aneuploidy and numerical chromosomal aberrations occurring in larger histological areas. However, section ISH was also capable of revealing (small) focal cytogenetic abnormalities, due to a precise analysis of only target cells. Focal abnormalities were not detected by suspension ISH, probably due to an admixture of non-aberrant tumor cells and stromal elements."
8797584	Identification and characterization of proximal 6q deletions in prostate cancer.	"Allelic loss of 8p, 10q, 13q, 16q, and 18q has been frequently demonstrated in prostate cancer, implying the existence of putative tumor suppressor genes in these regions. However, there are likely a number of additional genetic events that define the progression from normal prostatic epithelium to prostate cancer that have yet to be identified. To characterize a novel region of deletion in sporadic prostate cancers, 52 tumors obtained from radical prostatectomy cases were analyzed for loss of heterozygosity (LOH) using 10 polymorphic markers spanning chromosome 6 including one marker on 6p and nine markers on 6q. Markers were selected from available databases, and a comprehensive linkage map was constructed. By this analysis, LOH for one or more polymorphic markers was detected in 17 of 52 sporadic prostate cancer cases (33%). Thirteen of 17 tumors were shown to have a common region of allelic loss extending from D6S286 to D6S283 or 6q14-21, with a minimum region of loss containing markers D6S1082 and D6S501. A second separate region of deletion centered around marker D6S404. LOH of one or more 6q markers did not correlate with Gleason grade or pathological stage of the cancer. In summary, this is the first comprehensive analysis of 6q deletions in prostate cancer, and we conclude that 6q14-21 may harbor a tumor suppressor gene important in prostate carcinogenesis."
8827088	Point mutations of the Mxil gene are rare in prostate cancers.	"Overexpression of the Myc genes promote cellular transformation. Max protein exerts a pivotal function with the Myc family, and Mxi1/Mad proteins play a positive and negative activity, respectively, on transcription. The function of Mxi1 suggests that it might be a tumor suppressor protein. The Mxi1 gene map to 10p24-25 and deletions of this locus are frequently observed in prostate cancers. The N-terminal helical motif, helix-loop-helix (HLH) and leucine zipper (ZIP) regions of the Mxi1 gene are functionally important. We analyzed most of the coding region of the Mxi1 gene, including these three important regions in 32 prostate cancers and three cell lines by PCR-single strand conformational polymorphism (SSCP). To enrich neoplastic cells, the microdissection was performed on clinical samples. We detected a silent mutation in the HLH region, but no point mutations reflecting the functional change of Mxi1 were found in human prostate cancers. Point mutations of the Mxi1 gene, if they occur, must be minor events in primary prostate cancers."
8832746	Numerical chromosomal changes in high-grade prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia (PIN) and concomitant invasive carcinoma.	"Prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia (PIN) is regarded as a precursor lesion of at least some prostatic cancers. Using interphase cytogenetics, an in situ hybridization technique with chromosome specific probes, we investigated 15 prostatectomy specimens containing both invasive carcinoma and PIN for the presence of numerical changes of chromosomes 7, 8, 10, 17 and X. The results were correlated with tumor stage and Gleason grade as well as with morphological features of PIN. Of the 15 carcinomas, four were disomic, five displayed at least focal chromosomal gains and six were found to be aneusomic. A non-disomic chromosomal status correlated well with a higher tumor stage and grade. Although the majority of PIN glands showed an eusomy, focal chromosomal gains within single glands or parts of a gland could be observed in 12 of the 15 cases. All but one specimen with non-disomic carcinomas also harboured areas of PIN with numerical chromosomal aberrations, often laying directly adjacent to tumorous glands. Additionally, focal non-disomies of PIN could also be detected in two cases with eusomic cancer. With regard to numerical changes in PIN and cancer, no significant preponderance could be observed for the five chromosomes tested. We conclude that numerical chromosomal aberrations are a frequent, but mostly focal event in PIN. This karyotypic instability is further evidence for the premalignant nature of this lesion."
8898547	Androgen receptor mutations in prostate cancer.	"AR gene mutations occur in both early-stage prostate cancers (28, 51, our unpublished data) and late-stage disease (36, 37, 55-57). One common feature is that both types of mutations retain ligand-dependent transcriptional activity. We speculate that AR mutations may characterize a more aggressive disease, or confer an ability to survive androgen ablation therapy. A large percentage of tumors appears to have no AR gene mutation, but the possibility has not been ruled out that tumors without an AR gene mutation may nonetheless produce variant AR, for example, by alternative splicing. The apparent absence of AR gene mutations in the majority of early-stage tumors indicates that the role of androgen in the development of clinical prostate cancer is mediated predominantly by a normal AR gene, which exists as multiple alleles that differ in glutamine and glycine repeat length, and that potentially differ in signal-transducing activity. Glutamine and glycine repeat length may thereby modulate the effect of androgen on tumor cell proliferation. The effect of glutamine and glycine repeat length on AR function may determine the sensitivity of tumor cells to existing tissue levels of dihydrotestosterone, but tissue dihydrotestosterone levels depend on circulating androgen levels and the amount of 5 alpha-reductase activity in the tissue. Therefore, although potential AR activity may be affected by the length of the glutamine and/or glycine repeat, actual AR activity will depend also on these other factors."
8954049	Androgen receptor CAG repeat lengths in prostate cancer: correlation with age of onset.	"The androgen receptor (AR) is a structurally conserved member of the nuclear receptor superfamily. The amino-terminal domain is required for transcriptional activation and contains a region of polyglutamine encoded by CAG trinucleotide repeats. In humans, the number of CAG repeats is polymorphic; the average number is 22 in Caucasian males. Expansion of CAG repeats in the AR has clinical implications for human disease. As androgen influences prostate cancer growth, polymorphisms in CAG repeat length may affect the clinical course of patients with prostate cancer. To test for an association between clinical parameters of human prostate cancer and CAG repeat length, we analyzed normal lymphocyte DNA from 109 patients. The CAG region of the AR was amplified by the PCR. Reaction products were then amplified using end-labeled internal primers, cut at the internal PstI site and assayed on sequencing gels using a sequence ladder as a size standard. Sequence analysis of several samples validated this method for measurement of CAG repeat number. The median age of patients was 63 yr (range, 42-83), with 104 Caucasian, 2 African American, 1 Asian, and 2 other racial origin. The median repeat length was 25 for patients with stage A, 22 for patients with stage B, 22 for patients with stage C, and 23 for patients presenting with stage D disease. A significant correlation between CAG repeat length and age at onset was observed, whereas correlations with stage, level of prostate-specific antigen at diagnosis, and time to prostate-specific antigen relapse were not significant. Shorter CAG repeat lengths may be associated with the development of prostate cancer in men at a younger age. These data suggest that CAG repeat length can affect the risk of developing prostate cancer."
8979030	Automated assessment of numerical chromosomal aberrations in paraffin embedded prostate tumor cells stained by in situ hybridization.	"We investigated the feasibility of automated counting of in situ hybridization signals (ISH) in interphase cells isolated from paraffin embedded prostate tissue. In total, 34 specimens from 7 patients with prostate cancer were stained with probes specific for the centromeric regions of chromosomes Y, 1, 7, 8, 10, and 15, using an immunoperoxidase based technique suitable for bright-field microscopy. Enumeration of the number of ISH spots of 500 nuclei per specimen was performed (1) using an automatic system developed without any human intervention and (2) using the same system, but including verification of the counts based on visual inspection of the stored images. As reference from each specimen, 200 cell nuclei were evaluated manually, using conventional microscopy. A typical analysis procedure (including user verification) took 35 min. The difference (root mean error) between the automated counting and the counting after visual interaction was relatively small (15%). The percentage of cells with incorrect counts by automated analysis was 20.2%, a number that could easily be improved by user interaction. Detection of cells with aneusomy proved to be more sensitive compared to the routine manual counting, in cases where aberrant frequencies were low. Automated counting of samples with low frequencies (< 10%) resulted in a higher frequency of aberrant cells in 9 of 11 cases, probably due to the fact that an unbiased cell selection is guaranteed. Automated assessment of ISH signals is considered useful for the evaluation of chromosomal aberrations in prostate tumor cells, provided that the counts are visually confirmed."
8981668	Androgen receptor gene amplification: a novel molecular mechanism for endocrine therapy resistance in human prostate cancer.	"Since the development and growth of the prostate cancer is highly dependent on androgens, androgen deprivation therapy continues to be the treatment of choice for patients with advanced prostate cancer. The therapy is very effective, but responses are often short-lived. We describe here a novel molecular mechanism that may explain why prostate cancer cells become resistant to hormonal therapy. Amplification of the androgen receptor (AR) gene was found to be selected for during androgen deprivation therapy in 23% of prostate cancer patients who experienced local tumor recurrence. Amplification leads to increased expression of the AR gene, which enables the cancer cells to more effectively utilize the residual low levels of androgens for sustaining cell growth. Discovery of AR amplification as a possible molecular mechanism of therapy resistance in prostate cancer should prove useful for development of more effective endocrine therapy regimens as well as diagnostic and predictive tests for therapy failure."
8998185	p53 status and prognosis of locally advanced prostatic adenocarcinoma: a study based on RTOG 8610.	"BACKGROUND: The p53 tumor suppressor gene (also known as TP53) is one of the most frequently mutated genes in human cancer. Several studies have shown that p53 mutations are infrequent in prostate cancer and are associated with advanced disease. PURPOSE: We assessed the prognostic value of identifying abnormal p53 protein expression in the tumors of patients with locally advanced prostate cancer who were treated with either external-beam radiation therapy alone or total androgen blockade before and during the radiation therapy. METHODS: The study population consisted of a subset of patients entered in Radiation Therapy Oncology Group protocol 8610 (""a phase III trial of Zoladex and flutamide used as cytoreductive agents in locally advanced carcinoma of the prostate treated with definitive radiotherapy""). Immunohistochemical detection of abnormal p53 protein in pretreatment specimens (i.e., needle biopsies or transurethral resections) was achieved by use of the monoclonal anti-p53 antibody DO7; specimens in which 20% or more of the tumor cell nuclei showed positive immunoreactivity were considered to have abnormal p53 protein expression. Associations between p53 protein expression status and the time to local progression, the incidence of distant metastases, progression-free survival, and overall survival were evaluated in univariate (logrank test) and multivariate (Cox proportional hazards model) analyses. Reported P values are two-sided. RESULTS: One hundred twenty-nine (27%) of the 471 patients entered in the trial had sufficient tumor material for analysis. Abnormal p53 protein expression was detected in the tumors of 23 (18%) of these 129 patients. Statistically significant associations were found between the presence of abnormal p53 protein expression and increased incidence of distant metastases (P = .04), decreased progression-free survival (P = .03), and decreased overall survival (P = .02); no association was found between abnormal p53 protein expression and the time to local progression (P = .58). These results were independent of the Gleason score and clinical stage. A significant treatment interaction was detected with respect to the development of distant metastases: Among patients receiving both radiation therapy and hormone therapy, those with tumors exhibiting abnormal p53 protein expression experienced a reduced time to the development of distant metastases (P = .001); for patients treated with radiation therapy alone, the time to distant metastases was unrelated to p53 protein expression status (P = .91). CONCLUSIONS: Determination of p53 protein expression status yield significant, independent prognostic information concerning the development of distant metastases, progression-free survival, and overall survival for patients with locally advanced prostate cancer who are treated primarily with radiation therapy. IMPLICATIONS: The interaction of radiation therapy plus hormone therapy and abnormal p53 protein expression may provide a clinical link to experimental evidence that radiation therapy and/or hormone therapy act, at least in part, by the induction of apoptosis (a cell death program) and suggests that this mechanism may be blocked in patients whose tumors have p53 mutations."
9006095	Absence of p16/MTS1 gene mutations in human prostate cancer.	"The tumor suppressor gene p16/MTS1, located on chromosome 9p21, is a cell cycle regulatory gene which is frequently altered in human cancers. The role of this gene in prostate cancer is unknown. To determine the frequency of deletions and point mutations of p16/MTS1 in human prostate cancer, we examined 18 cancer and matched benign and hyperplastic tissue specimens. Deletions of p16/MTS1 were detected by semi-quantitative multiplex polymerase chain reaction in which a portion of exon 2 of the p16/MTS1 gene and a control marker, the glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase gene, were amplified simultaneously. 'Cold' single-stranded conformational polymorphism (SSCP) analysis was performed to examine exons 1 and 2 of the p16/MTS1 gene for point mutations. Our data indicate no evidence for intragenic homozygous deletion in the prostate tumors. One prostate tumor and matched benign tissue showed mobility shifts. Direct DNA sequencing of the SSCP positive samples showed a G --> A transition in codon 140 which would result in an amino acid change from alanine to threonine. Our results indicate that deletions and point mutations in the p16/MTS1 gene are rare and do not play a major role in human prostate carcinogenesis."
902238	Flow microfluorometry and transrectal fine-needle biopsy in the classification of human prostatic carcinoma.	"Flow microfluorometry (FMF) and transrectal fine-needle biopsy were used for obtaining DNA histograms from 50 patients suffering from various prostatic lesions. Based on the cytomorphological pattern, the material was classified as benign prostatic hyperplasia (29 cases), suspected carcinoma (1 case), well-differentiated carcinoma (6 cases), moderately differentiated carcinoma (12 cases) and poorly differentiated carcinoma (2 cases). The biopsy material was prepared for FMF analysis according to a new detergent technique. It was observed that increasing anaplasia paralleled an increasing occurrence of cell populations in the tetraploid and octoploid DNA region. According to the DNA histograms the moderately differentiated carcinomas could be divided into two groups: one with no or a few tetraploid cells (similar to the well-differentiated carcinomas), and another with a high percentage of tetraploid and octoploid cells (similar to the poorly differentiated carcinomas). FMF analysis in combination with fine-needle biopsy is therefore proposed as a valuable addition to the cytomorphological classification of human prostatic carcinoma."
9042275	Focal microsatellite mutations in relatives with prostatic adenocarcinoma.	"Instability of short tandem repeat sequences, microsatellite instability (MI), has been reported to play an important role in the tumorigenesis of various adenocarcinomas, including prostatic adenocarcinoma. Although prostate cancer is not widely recognized as a heriditary cancer, familial clustering is well known. To investigate the frequency of microsatellite instability in familial prostatic adenocarcinomas we analyzed archival tumor tissue from seven paired first degree relatives with prostatic adenocarcinoma. Twelve dinucleotide, nine trinucleotide, six tetranucleotide repeats and the CAG repeat of the androgen receptor gene were screened for MI. Solitary mutations were observed in four separate cases (28.6%) and widespread somatic alterations were not identified. No statistical correlation to pathological characteristics was determined. Our data indicate that microsatellite instability is an uncommon phenomenon in prostatic adenocarcinoma within first degree relatives. Those changes present appear to manifest as focal mutations in contrast to the more global changes seen in MI."
9051125	[Molecular diagnostic detection of circulating tumor cells and their prognostic implications]	"While not all circulating tumor cells survive, one could postulate that patients with circulating tumor cells might be candidates for adjuvant chemotherapy because of the risk of relapse. Recently, reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) for the detection of circulating tumor cells has been suggested as a potential technique for staging of cancer. In malignant melanoma, the detection of circulating melanoma cells by tyrosinase RT-PCR correlated with the clinical stage of patients and was an independent prognostic factor for recurrence. A strong association was found between the detection of neuroblastoma cells in circulation by tyrosine hydroxylase RT-PCR with bone marrow micrometastasis. This method may be of use to identify early signs of relapse in disease-free patients. In prostatic cancer, the frequency of positivity for detection of circulating tumor cells in peripheral blood by PSA RT-PCR increased with tumor stages but a significant proportion of patients with metastatic disease were negative. The prognostic significance of the detection of tumor cell in blood in other epithelial tumors is not established and will require further long-term follow-up study."
9067262	A prevalent missense substitution that modulates activity of prostatic steroid 5alpha-reductase.	"Prostate cancer is the most common serious cancer diagnosed in men in the United States. This disease is also characterized by a striking racial/ethnic variation in incidence: highest in African-Americans, intermediate in Caucasians, slightly lower in Latinos, and lowest in Asians. Ample biochemical and epidemiological evidence suggests a role for androgens, particularly testosterone and dihydrotestosterone, in prostate cancer etiology. We have analyzed a candidate gene for prostate cancer, SRD5A2, encoding prostatic steroid 5alpha-reductase type II, which converts testosterone into the more bioactive dihydrotestosterone, for mutations. We report here one amino acid substitution, V89L, which replaces valine at codon 89 with leucine. This substitution is a ""germline"" (constitutional) DNA polymorphism, and it is common, panethnic, and reduces in vivo steroid 5alpha-reductase activity. This substitution is particularly common among Asians and may explain the low risk for prostate cancer in this population."
9067271	Loss of heterozygosity at chromosome 16q in prostate adenocarcinoma: identification of three independent regions.	"Loss of heterozygosity (LOH) on chromosome arm 16q is one of the most consistent genetic alterations in sporadic prostate cancer and may be involved in cancer development through inactivation of tumor suppressor genes. A candidate tumor suppressor gene on this chromosome arm, CDH1 at 16q22.1, is dysregulated in prostate cancer. However, no specific deletion map has been constructed from prostate tumors to determine whether CDH1 is the potential target gene for the observed LOH on 16q. To narrow down the region of 16q loss, we constructed a detailed deletion map that incorporates CDH1. We examined the pattern of allelic imbalance in prostate tissue from 22 patients with confined prostate tumors, 22 with local extracapsular extension, and 15 with metastatic forms, using 14 CA microsatellite repeats on 16q. Thirty-five of the 59 tumors tested showed LOH for at least one marker. We found evidence of 16q monosomy in 5 cases and partial allelic loss in 30. Our data provide evidence that three different target regions on 16q might be involved in the pathogenesis of prostate cancer. The first region is telomeric and lies at 16q24.3 between markers D16S520 and D16S413; the second, the most centromeric region in the 16q22.1 band, and limited by markers D16S347 and D16S318, is close to the CDH1 gene; the third, intermediate region, at 16q23.2, is bracketed by loci D16S518 and D16S507. The rate of LOH at 16q24.3 was significantly higher in metastatic forms (80%; 12 of 15) than localized forms (32%; 7 of 22), pointing to a gene related to invasiveness in prostate cancer."
9076469	Androgen receptor gene amplification in a recurrent prostate cancer after monotherapy with the nonsteroidal potent antiandrogen Casodex (bicalutamide) with a subsequent favorable response to maximal androgen blockade.	"OBJECTIVE: We recently found amplification of the androgen receptor (AR) gene in approximately 30% of locally recurrent prostate carcinomas from patients treated by conventional androgen deprivation (castration) therapy, whereas none of the untreated primary prostate tumors showed this amplification. This suggests that AR gene amplification was selected during androgen deprivation therapy. The present case study represents our initial approach to evaluate the role that AR amplification may play in therapy resistance after other forms of endocrine therapy. MATERIAL AND METHODS: Specimens from both a primary and a subsequent locally recurrent tumor were studied for amplification of the AR gene by fluorescence in situ hybridization from a prostate cancer patient who experienced tumor progression after monotherapy with the potent antiandrogen bicalutamide (Casodex, a trade mark, the property of Zeneca Ltd). RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS: High-level amplification of the AR gene was found in the recurrent tumor, whereas no evidence of amplification was found in the primary tumor. After recurrence, the patient first received chemotherapy (ifosfamide) for 15 weeks with no response, followed by maximal androgen blockade (MAB). The latter therapy resulted in a favorable short-term response. This case study has the following implications which warrant further research: (1) AR amplification may be selected not only by castration but also by therapy with a competitive peripheral androgen-receptor-blocking agent, and (2) recurrent tumors with AR amplification may be particularly likely to benefit from MAB as a second-line therapy."
9088270	Tumour-suppressor genes in prostatic oncogenesis: a positional approach.	"Genetic alterations, such as mutation, methylation and aneuploidy, are thought to underlie the multistep genesis and progression of many human cancers. However, the genetic events occurring in prostatic oncogenesis are still relatively poorly understood. This is especially so in early-stage tumours, in which mutations of known oncogenes or tumour-suppressor genes appear to be quite infrequent. Allelic losses of chromosome arms 7q, 8p, 10, 16q and 18q suggest the involvement of novel suppressor loci on these chromosomes; allelic losses of chromosome arm 8p are especially frequent and may be detected even in early-stage tumours. We have used a positional approach to seek novel genetic targets in prostate cancer, including allelic-loss mapping of chromosome 8p and physical mapping of chromosome band 8p22 around the MSR gene. A homozygous somatic deletion in one prostatic nodal metastasis was mapped in this region and spanned 730-970 kb. This region was then examined in detail for expressed sequences. One novel gene, called N33, was found to be silenced by a methylation mechanism in most colon cancer cell lines and some primary colorectal tumours. Characterization of additional chromosome 8p22 candidates is in progress."
9111707	Androgen receptor gene mutations in prostate cancer. Implications for disease progression and therapy.	"Recent studies indicate that androgen receptors are present in all histological types of prostatic tumours, in relapsed prostatic carcinomas and in tumour metastases, even those obtained from patients in whom endocrine therapy was unsuccessful. Several research groups have asked whether structurally altered androgen receptors might be present in human prostatic tumours. The first androgen receptor mutation in prostate cancer was detected in the tumour cell line LNCaP. The frequency of androgen receptor mutations in primary tumours of the prostate is relatively low. In contrast, a high frequency of mutations has been reported in bone metastases from patients who did not respond to endocrine therapy. This fact may reflect genetic instability in these late tumour stages. Mutant androgen receptors detected in human prostate cancer cells are 'promiscuous receptors'; that is, they are activated not only by synthetic and testicular androgens, but also by adrenal androgens, products of dihydrotestosterone metabolism, estrogenic and progestagenic steroids, and even by nonsteroidal antiandrogens. Interestingly, the nonsteroidal antiandrogens hydroxyflutamide and nilutamide, but not bicalutamide, have been reported to have agonistic effects at mutant androgen receptors. It is speculated that the existence of androgen receptor mutations may explain, at least in part, the 'antiandrogen withdrawal syndrome': a temporary improvement in a subpopulation of prostate cancer patients following cessation of an antiandrogen from a therapeutic protocol. Further studies on androgen receptor alterations in prostate cancer should focus on metastatic specimens obtained from the late stages of this disease."
9144890	The antiandrogen withdrawal syndrome.	"In 1989 the unanticipated agonist effect of antiandrogens on LNCaP prostate cancer cells was detected. A ""flutamide withdrawal syndrome"" was first described by Kelly and Scher [15], who reported a decrease in serum prostate-specific antigen (PSA) levels after the removal of flutamide from the treatment regimen. In the last few years the paradoxical response to antiandrogens has also been reported for bicalutamide, chlormadinone acetate and others. Therefore the name of the syndrome has changed to ""antiandrogen withdrawal syndrome."" Several reasons such as mutations in the androgen receptor or a direct stimulatory effect of the antiandrogen for this effect have been discussed, but the exact molecular mechanism remains unclear. However, in patients with hormonally relapsed prostate cancer, a trial of ""withdrawal therapy"" is required prior to the initiation of toxic therapies."
9190801	Altered localization of HrpZ in Pseudomonas syringae pv. syringae hrp mutants suggests that different components of the type III secretion pathway control protein translocation across the inner and outer membranes of gram-negative bacteria.	"Pseudomonas syringae pv. syringae 61 (Pss61) secretes the HrpZ harpin by a type III protein secretion pathway encoded by a cluster of hrp (hypersensitive response and pathogenicity) and hrc genes. The nine hrc genes represent a subset of hrp genes that are also conserved in the type III virulence protein secretion systems of animal pathogenic Yersinia, Shigella, and Salmonella spp. The hrpJ and hrpU operons contain seven hrc genes (counting hrcQ(A) and hrcQ(B) as one gene), all with additional homologs involved in flagellar biogenesis and secretion, and five of which encode predicted inner membrane proteins. The hrpC and hrpZ operons encode HrcC and HrcJ, respectively, which are associated with the outer membrane. Interposon mutants affected in all of the hrc genes in the hrpJ and hrpU operons and TnphoA-induced hrcC and hrcJ mutants were assayed for altered localization of HrpZ in mid-log-phase cultures by immunoblotting sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gels that were run with various cell fractions. The hrpJ and hrpU operon mutants revealed a novel phenotype of partially reduced accumulation of HrpZ in the total culture (despite wild-type levels of hrpZ operon transcription), all of which was cell bound and equivalent in level to that of cell-bound HrpZ in the wild type. The hrcC and hrcJ mutant cultures accumulated the same total amount of HrpZ as the wild type, but the HrpZ was cell bound. Among all the strains tested, only the hrcC mutant accumulated significant amounts of HrpZ in the periplasm, as indicated by selective release through spheroplasting. Analysis of nonpolar mutations in the hrpU and hrpC operons support the results obtained with polar mutations. These observations indicate that a constant pool of HrpZ is maintained in the cytoplasm of Pss61 despite secretion deficiencies, that the hrpJ and hrpU operons encode an alternative to the Sec (general protein export) pathway for translocation across the inner membrane, that genes in the hrpC operon are necessary for translocation across the outer membrane, and that the Pss61 Hrp system permits study of two genetically distinguishable stages in type III protein secretion."
9207959	Genetic predisposition to prostate cancer: possible explanations for ethnic differences in risk.	"BACKGROUND: It seems unlikely that the large ethnic differences in prostate cancer risk can be explained completely by ethnic differences in diet or other lifestyle characteristics. Instead, the differences may be due to ethnic variation in endogenous factors, such as androgen metabolism or inherited susceptibility. METHODS: We have reviewed the literature for evidence and support of ethnic variation in genetic susceptibility to prostate cancer as a reason for the ethnic differences in rates. RESULTS: We distinguish two types of ethnic variation: 1) variation in the prevalence of certain alleles of specific genes that confer modestly increased risk. Such variation might be reflected in ethnic differences in serum levels of androgens, their metabolites, or indicators of metabolism in the prostate; 2) variation in the prevalence of rare germline mutations conferring substantially increased risk. Such variation would be reflected in ethnic differences in familial aggregation of prostate cancer. We discuss the evidence in support of each of these two possibilities. CONCLUSIONS: Ethnic variation in polymorphic alleles of genes associated with modest fluctuations in risk could explain a large proportion of the ethnic difference in cancer risk. In contrast, rare mutations associated with substantially increased risk are likely to account for a smaller fraction of these differences."
9219834	"Deletion of chromosome 11p15, p12, q22, q23-24 loci in human prostate cancer."	"Loss of heterozygosity (LOH) on chromosome 11 is frequently altered in various epithelial cancers. The present study was designed to investigate LOH on chromosome 11 in microdissected samples of normal prostatic epithelium and invasive carcinoma from the same patients. For this purpose, DNA was extracted from the microdissected normal and tumor cells of 38 prostate cancers, amplified by polymerase chain reaction PCR and analyzed for LOH on chromosome 11 using 9 different polymorphic DNA markers (D11S1307, D11S989, D11S1313, D11S898, D11S940, D11S1818, D11S924, D11S1336 and D11S912). LOH on chromosome 11 was identified in 30 of 38 cases (78%) with at least one marker. Four distinct regions of loss detected were: 1) at 11p15, at loci between D11S1307 and D11S989; 2) at 11p12, on locus D11S131 (11p12); 3) at 11q22, on loci D11S898, D11S940 and D11S1818; and 4) at 11q23-24, on loci between D11S1336 and D11S912. We found 25% of the tumors with LOH at 11p15; 39% had LOH at 11p12; 66% had LOH at 11q22; and 47% had LOH at 11q23-24. These deletions at 11p15, 11p12, 11q22 and 11q23-24 loci were not related to the stage or grade of the tumor."
9223669	Frequent loss of heterozygosity on chromosome 10q in muscle-invasive transitional cell carcinomas of the bladder.	"Loss of heterozygosity (LOH) on chromosome 10 has been observed in several human cancers including glioblastomas, meningiomas, melanomas and endometrial and prostate carcinomas. We have investigated the incidence of LOH on chromosome 10 in 36 human transitional cell carcinomas (TCCs) of the bladder, three upper urinary tract TCCs and one lymph node metastasis, using a panel of 27 highly polymorphic markers spanning 10p (short arm) and 10q (long arm). Fourteen bladder tumours (39%), the three upper urinary tract tumours and the lymph node metastasis showed LOH for at least one locus on chromosome 10. Remarkably, LOH on chromosome 10 was observed mainly in muscle-invasive (P = 0.01) and high grade tumours (P = 0.03). For five tumours and the lymph node metastasis, LOH was found at all informative loci, indicating monosomy or isodisomy of chromosome 10. The deletion mapping of the tumours with partial loss delineated two minimal regions of loss on chromosome 10q. One region, the most telomeric, was bounded by markers D10S214 and D10S169 and the other, the most proximal, was bounded by markers D10S222 and D10S531. Our results demonstrate that chromosome 10q LOH is common in muscle-invasive bladder cancers and that two potential tumour suppressor loci, at 10q24.1-q24.3 and 10q26.1-q26.2, may contribute to the malignant progression of these tumours. Localization of the smallest common regions of loss in bladder tumours provides a starting point for the identification of the genes involved."
9224752	HER-2/neu gene amplification status in prostate cancer by fluorescence in situ hybridization.	"HER-2/neu expression has been established as a prognostic factor in breast and other cancers. In prostate cancer (PC), a similar predictive role has been hindered by variable immunohistochemical (IHC) results. The authors studied DNA amplification of the HER-2/neu gene on 4-microm sections obtained from 62 formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded PCs by fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH). The results were compared with HER-2/neu protein expression as determined by IHC and correlated by logistic regression analysis with Gleason tumor grade, DNA ploidy, serum prostate specific antigen (PSA), and pathological stage. The HER-2/neu gene was localized using the Oncor (Gaithersburg, MD) digoxigenin-labeled unique sequence probe. Amplified PCs had at least 20 malignant cells, with 5 or more copies of the sequence. Amplification of HER-2/neu correlated with Gleason score (P = .0001). The mean Gleason score of unamplified tumors was 5.7 and that of amplified tumors was 7.5. Nondiploid tumors had a significantly greater rate of HER-2/neu amplification compared with diploid tumors (P = .0003). Of the 62 cases evaluated by IHC and FISH, 18 cases (29%) were overexpressed by IHC, and 27 cases (44%) were amplified by FISH. A trend for similar HER-2/neu status in each PC by the two methods did not reach statistical significance (P = .23). HER-2/neu amplification by FISH was associated with advanced pathological stage; however, this relationship reached only near-statistical significance (P = .06). There was no correlation of HER-2/neu amplification by FISH with patient age or preoperative serum PSA levels. The authors conclude that HER-2/neu gene amplification status can be determined by FISH on archival prostate cancer specimens, significantly correlates with high tumor grade and nondiploid DNA content, and is more frequently encountered in tumors with advanced pathological stage. Also, FISH is more sensitive than IHC for detection of abnormalities in the HER-2/neu gene, and further studies should be undertaken to determine whether a FISH-based HER-2/neu detection method may prove of importance in the prediction of prognosis and planning of therapy in prostate cancer patients."
9225161	Hyperactive androgen receptor in prostate cancer: what does it mean for new therapy concepts?	"Investigations on androgen signaling alterations in the late stages of prostate cancer revealed new molecular mechanisms that may be in part responsible for failure of endocrine therapy. Both primary and metastatic lesions from prostate cancer express androgen receptor protein. Amplification of androgen receptor gene occurs in a subset of prostate cancer patients. Several point mutations of androgen receptor gene have been described; they generate receptors which are functionally activated by androgens, other steroids, and even by antihormones. The frequency of androgen receptor mutations may be high in tumor metastases. Functional activity of androgen receptor is influenced by nonsteroidal factors, such as peptide growth factors and second messengers. Thus, prostate cancer cells adapt to low androgen environment by various mechanisms utilizing androgen receptor. Therefore, new strategies for switching off the androgen receptor are needed."
9258600	Molecular cytogenetics of prostate cancer.	"Prostate cancer is the most common malignancy among men in many developed countries. One-fourth of prostate cancers are diagnosed at metastatic stage but there is no curative treatment for such disease and palliative androgen withdrawal therapy remains the most used one. Thus, understanding the molecular events that underlie the development and progression of prostate cancer could help to answer many clinical questions on its treatment. In this review article, I want to illustrate some of the most interesting findings (by fluorescence in situ hybridization and comparative genomic hybridization) in the molecular cytogenetics of prostate cancer."
9269995	Loss of heterozygosity at 16q24.1-q24.2 is significantly associated with metastatic and aggressive behavior of prostate cancer.	"Several studies have indicated that in prostate cancer, frequent aberrations take place in several genomic regions. In the present study, we have analyzed allelic losses in chromosome 16 region q in 50 prostate cancer specimens of various histological grades. The most frequently deleted region was located at 16q23-16q24.2 between loci D16S504 and D16S422. The highest percentage of loss of heterozygosity (LOH) at 16q was also found within this area at loci HSD17B2 and D16S422 located at 16q24.1-q24.2. The LOH at 16q24.1-q24.2 was significantly associated with clinically aggressive behavior of the disease, metastatic disease, and higher tumor grade. Of the metastatic diseases, 83% showed LOH, whereas only 40% of the nonmetastatic diseases were found to show it. Similarly, LOH was found in 76% of the clinically aggressive diseases and in 33% of the nonaggressive diseases. The data suggest that a potentially important gene associated with prostate cancer progression is located close to 16q24.1-q24.2."
9285566	Comparative mutational analysis of DPC4 (Smad4) in prostatic and colorectal carcinomas.	"Allelic deletions of chromosome 18q are reported to be common in prostate and colorectal cancers, suggesting that one or more tumor suppressor genes on 18q are involved in the genesis of these neoplasms. The DPC4 gene, a recently identified candidate tumor suppressor in 18q21, was examined for evidence of inactivation in prostatic carcinomas, and results compared to those of a parallel analysis of colorectal carcinomas, for which DPC4 mutation has been reported in approximately 10% of cases. In this study, only three (10%) of 29 informative primary prostate cancers showed allelic loss of chromosome 18q21 markers, and no point mutations or deletions of DPC4 were detected in the complete set of 45 primary or metastatic cases. In contrast, five (56%) of nine primary colorectal tumors displayed allelic loss of 18q markers and in one of these a somatically acquired G-->T missense mutation was found in exon 1. Of twelve colorectal tumor cell lines, one showed a G-->C missense mutation in exon 8 and two had partial homozygous deletions that would likely abrogate gene function. These data suggest that DPC4 is rarely if ever mutated during prostatic oncogenesis, whereas inactivation of this gene may contribute to the genesis of a subset of colorectal carcinomas."
9299579	Androgen-regulated gene expression in prostate cancer.	"Androgen-regulated gene expression is mediated by the ligand-activated androgen receptor. Androgen receptor target genes contain in the regulatory regions one or more androgen response elements. Development of the male urogenital tract, including the prostate, depends on an activated androgen receptor. Similarly, growth of the majority of prostate cancers is androgen-dependent. Therefore, endocrine therapy, aimed at inhibition of androgen receptor functioning, has been applied for many years. However, during therapy, apparently androgen receptor independent cancers continue to grow. In general, these tumors still express the androgen receptor, suggesting a functional role of the androgen receptor. In a proportion of late stage prostate tumors, mutations and amplification of the androgen receptor gene have been found. Additionally, it has been hypothesized that ligand-independent androgen receptor activation can be involved in hormone refractory prostate cancer."
9311591	High frequency of genetic instability of microsatellites in human prostatic adenocarcinoma.	"In order to investigate the genomic instability associated with prostate cancer, 36 microsatellite marker loci on chromosomes 1p, 3p, 5q, 8p, 8q, 9p, 11q and 13q were analyzed using microdissected samples from prostate cancer and adjoining microscopically normal tissues from the same slide. DNA was extracted from the normal and tumor cells of 40 microdissected prostate-cancer samples, amplified by PCR, and analyzed for microsatellite instability (MSI) using 36 different polymorphic DNA markers. In the present study, we have utilized a highly refined technique of PCR product separation on a sequencing gel, developed in our laboratory, which clearly shows high-quality results for the microsatellite instability in prostate cancer. The results of this study suggest that 45% (18 out of 40) showed genomic instability at a minimum of 1 locus; 4 cases each showed MSI at one and 2 loci, 4 cases had MSI at 3 loci, 3 cases showed MSI at 5 loci, while one case each showed MSI at 7, 8 and 15 loci. There was no significant correlation between the MSI and stage or grade of the tumors. This extensive study on genomic instability in prostate cancer found the occurrence of MSI to be very high, which suggests a role of MSI in the pathophysiology of prostate cancer."
9321930	Involvement of the multiple tumor suppressor genes and 12-lipoxygenase in human prostate cancer. Therapeutic implications.	"We performed a detailed and comprehensive study of the involvement of tumor suppressor genes in human prostate cancer. We utilized primers flanking either the restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP) or variable number of tandem repeat [VNTR; microsatellite or simple repeat site (SRS)] polymorphic sites to polymerase chain reaction (PCR) amplify the genomic DNA and detect loss of heterozygosity of the target genes. Quantitative reverse transcription (RT)-PCR was performed to measure the mRNA expression levels and PCR/single strand conformational polymorphism (SSCP) and DNA sequencing carried out to detect mutation of the tumor suppressor genes. We found that multiple tumor suppressor genes (e.g., p53, DCC, APC, MCC, BRCA1, and WAF1/CIP1) were inactivated at different frequencies via various mechanisms [e.g., loss of heterozygosity (LOH), loss of expression (LOE), mutation, and inactivation by cellular binding protein]. Several important and novel findings are as following: LOH and LOE of the DCC gene, LOH, LOE, and possible mutation of the APC/MCC genes, LOH of the BRCA1 locus, and mutation of the WAF1/CIP1 gene. For p53 tumor suppressor gene alone, multiple inactivation mechanisms (i.e., LOH, LOE, mutation, and amplification of the cellular inactivating protein MDM2) were identified. A possible involvement of genomic instability or mutator phenotype in human prostate cancer was investigated by microsatellite typing using PCR. A high frequency of microsatellite instability was detected and the microsatellite instability found to correlate with advanced stage and poor differentiation of prostate cancer, suggesting that genes functioning in DNA mismatch repair or general stabilization of the genome may be involved in prostate cancer. The results obtained in this study suggested that multiple tumor suppressor genes (both known and unknown genes) may share the role in prostate cancer; a pattern which has been found in a number of human malignancies such as cancers of the esophagus, colon and breast. In fact, we performed deletion studies aimed at localizing potential tumor suppressor loci on various chromosomal regions. A number of chromosomal regions (i.e., 6p12-24 and 17q21) were found to potentially harbor unidentified tumor suppressor genes. Detailed deletion mapping has localized the potential tumor suppressor loci to a < 2 Mb region centromeric to the BRCA1 gene on chromosome 17q. In addition, we identified a number of novel mechanisms of tumor suppressor gene inactivation, in prostate cancer such as loss of mRNA expression of the DCC, APC, MCC and p53 gene, and mutator phenotype. And for the very first time, we identified somatic mutations of the WAF1/CIP1 gene in primary human malignancy-human prostate cancer. This finding provides the first evidence in primary tumor that the WAF1/CIP1 gene may be a tumor suppressor gene and may be involved in prostate cancer. We identified 12-lipoxygenase (12-LOX) as a potential prognostic marker for human prostate cancer. mRNA expression levels of the 12-LOX gene was measured by quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and semi-quantitative in situ hybridization (ISH) in 122 pairs of matched normal and tumor tissues from prostate cancer patients. We found that 12-LOX expression levels were elevated in approximately half of the patients analyzed and the 12-LOX elevation correlates with advanced stage, poor differentiation, and surgical margin positivity. Our data suggest that 12-LOX may serve as a correlative marker for a more aggressive phenotype of prostate cancer and therefore for poor prognosis. We are currently refining our assays for possible clinical applicability. Since not all patients with loss of expression of the DCC gene showed LOH of the DCC locus, there must be other mechanism(s) responsible for loss of expression of the DCC gene. When we analyzed the relationship between DCC loss of expression and 12-LOX elevation in prostate cancer pati"
9331564	Allelic losses on 18q21 are associated with progression and metastasis in human prostate cancer.	"We analyzed normal/tumor DNA pairs obtained from 46 patients with prostate cancers (stage B, 16 cases; C, 10 cases; D1, 4 cases; and endocrine therapy-resistant cancer-death, 16 cases) for loss of heterozygosity using 32 microsatellite markers on chromosome 18. Seventeen of the 46 cases (37%) showed loss of heterozygosity (LOH) for at least one locus on the long arm. Detailed deletion mapping in these tumors identified a distinct commonly deleted region within a 5-cM interval in 18q21.1. There was a statistical correlation between the frequency of LOH on 18q and clinical stage (chi 2 = 12.3; P = 0.0064). LOH on 18q was observed more frequently in Stage D1 cases (4/4; 100%) than in stage B+C cases (5/26; 19%; P = 0.0046, Fisher's exact test). In 8 of 9 (89%) cancer-death patients from whom DNAs were available from both primary and metastatic tumors, the primary tumors had either no detectable abnormality of chromosome 18 or the region involving loss of heterozygosity was limited while the metastatic foci showed more frequent and extended allelic losses on this chromosome. No abnormalities were detected in the DCC and DPC4 genes when their exons were analyzed separately by single strand conformation polymorphism assay. These results suggest that inactivation of one or more putative tumor suppressor genes on 18q21 other than DCC and DPC4 plays an important role in the progression of human prostate cancer."
9374953	"Common cancers--genetics, origin, prevention, screening: Parts I and II."	"Carcinogenesis is a stepwise process that occurs through mutations of cancer-related genes. Five or more genes must be mutated before malignant transformation occurs in most adult cancers; in some childhood cancers as few as two mutated genes may be sufficient. A rare inherited mutation of a critical gene may predestine cancer to occur in one or more sites. This germline mutation is present in virtually every cell in the body, except half of the germ cells, which do not contain the mutated gene in their haploid chromosome set. These and other genes have been used to piece together a puzzle of regulatory systems that govern cell division and proliferation, as well as apoptosis or programmed cell death. Mutations of these genes result not only in increased cell proliferation but also in diminished cell death. Most genetic changes that occur during carcinogenesis are not inherited or germline. They are acquired after birth and are called somatic mutations. A somatic mutation affects only the mutated cell and its progeny. Each time a cell divides, there is a chance of somatic mutation, and therefore there always is a low, background risk for cancer and other malignant lesions. A far more prevalent cause of cancer-related death in the United States is environmental exposure. Such exposure causes somatic mutations of cancer-related genes through direct damage to DNA or through alteration of proliferation or cell death, which enhances the baseline risk for mutation. As carcinogenesis becomes understood, interventions may be designed that selectively interfere in important steps. Screening for cancer is based on the premise that one can treat a patient for a cancer that has not spread from its primary site. Nevertheless, cancer screening is controversial and often confusing. Issues of costs, risks versus benefits, physical time and effort, and patient compliance all affect the clinician's view of screening, often to the extent that the true value of this approach to cancer control is underappreciated and underutilized. A clinician should consider the following questions when assessing the priority, scope, and intensity of cancer screening. Is the cancer an important public health problem? Can preclinical stages be detected and cured? Are effective screening tests available? Are the tests feasible and acceptable? Have screening programs reduced cancer-specific mortality? Is the screening program cost effective? Is screening generally recommended? There is clear-cut evidence of benefit from screening for cancer of the cervix, breast, colon and rectum, and skin and some specific genetic syndromes. Evidence of survival benefit from screening for prostate cancer is lacking, although prostate specific antigen screening is widely used. Screening for lung and ovarian cancer is ineffective."
9377551	"Coding region of NKX3.1, a prostate-specific homeobox gene on 8p21, is not mutated in human prostate cancers."	"Loss of heterozygosity at chromosome 8p21-22 is common in human prostate cancer, suggesting the presence of one or more tumor suppressor genes at this locus. A homeobox gene that is expressed specifically in adult human prostate, NKX3.1, the expression of which is regulated by androgen, maps to chromosome 8p21. Fine structure in situ mapping showed that NKX3.1 is proximal to MSR32 (macrophage scavenger receptor type II) and LPL (human lipoprotein lipase) and very close to NEFL (human neurofilament light chain) on 8p21. Single-strand conformational polymorphism analysis of 48 radical prostatectomy cancer specimens and 3 metastases for the entire coding region of NKX3.1 showed no tumor-specific sequence alterations in 50 specimens and total absence of the gene in 1 specimen known to have a biallelic deletion of 8p21. NKX3.1 was found to have a polymorphism at nucleotide 154 in codon 52 that resulted in a CGC-->TGC sequence change and an Arg-->Cys amino acid alteration (R52C). This polymorphism was present in 20% of DNA samples. If NKX3.1 is a target of the 8p21 LOH, it is not via disruption of the coding region of the gene."
9426051	Precise microdissection of human prostate cancers reveals genotypic heterogeneity.	"To determine the incidence of genetic heterogeneity in primary prostate cancer, we have microdissected 125 tumor and mesenchymal foci from 18 patient biopsies and analyzed the DNA for loss of heterozygosity using PCR microsatellite markers. In 100% of patients with genetic lesions on chromosome 8p, there was evidence for intratumoral genetic heterogeneity. There was also a low but significant incidence of loss of heterozygosity in mesenchymal tissue. Our results show that phenotypically similar tumor foci can have different genotypes and provide evidence for the multifocality of tumor development in the prostate."
9430782	Molecular heterogeneity in prostate cancer: can TP53 mutation unravel tumorigenesis?	"While prostate cancer is the most common malignant visceral neoplasm of men, its etiology remains largely unknown and its clinical course unpredictable. Molecular genetics of prostate cancer has become a fruitful area of investigation and might provide clues to understanding these phenomena. Mutation of the TP53 tumor suppressor gene (encoding the p53 protein) has been commonly reported as a critical event in human carcinogenesis, but recent findings in prostate cancer research call into question the correlation between TP53 mutation and prognosis for patients with this tumor. Whole-mount analysis has begun to address the histologic significance of the focal evolution of TP53 mutation in a pre-existing cancer and to reveal its role throughout the process of tumor progression. This model might also apply to other tumors."
9458379	The MXI1 tumor suppressor gene is not mutated in primary prostate cancer.	"For prostate cancer, allelic deletions from the long arm of chromosome 10 (#10q23-25), the locus of the putative tumor suppressor gene MXI1 (#10q24-25), have been identified as a frequently occurring genetic event. During the development of several human malignancies, the c-myc proto-oncogene has been identified to enhance cellular transformation, mitogenesis and cell proliferation. The MXI1 gene, belonging to the helix-loop-helix (bHLH) gene family, was demonstrated to display tumor suppressor function by antagonizing c-myc induced transcriptional activities. Due to the detection of point mutations in the retained alleles of four primary adenocarcinomas of the prostate, MXI1 gene alterations have been suggested to be involved in the development and/or the progression of prostate cancer. To evaluate the role of MXI1 gene alterations for the development of adenocarcinoma of the prostate, 42 primary prostate cancers of different stage (T1-4) and histological grade (G1-3) were investigated for alterations within exons 4 and 5 of the MXI1 gene (spanning 6 exons in total), encoding for the functional HLH-Zip domain, by RNA-SSCP analysis and direct PCR-DNA-sequencing following the microscopically guided tumor cell dissection from 5 microm fresh-frozen buffer-soaked tissue sections. Even by application of this highly elaborated technical approach, MXI1 gene alterations could not be deleted in any of the tumor specimens investigated. Therefore, a substantial involvement of MXI1 gene alterations in the development of prostate cancer appears unlikely. The newly identified putative tumor suppressor gene PTEN, located at #10q23, might be responsible for the frequently observed allelic deletions from #10q23-25 in prostate cancer."
9460501	Genetic alterations in prostate cancer cell lines detected by comparative genomic hybridization.	"Recent studies have identified several chromosomal regions that are altered in prostate cancer. However, the specific genes affected are, in most of the cases, not known. Cancer cell lines could provide a valuable resource for cloning of genes that are commonly affected in cancer. The first step in the identification of such genes is the detection of chromosomal aberrations. Here, we have used comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) to screen for genetic alterations in four prostate cancer cell lines, LNCaP, DU145, PC-3, and TSU-Pr1. The analysis showed that, except for the LNCaP, these cell lines contained many genetic changes (> or = 10 per cell line), suggesting that they resemble genetically more closely hormone-refractory or metastatic than primary prostate carcinomas. All the chromosomal regions that have been implicated in prostate cancer were altered in at least one of the cell lines. The most common genetic changes were gain at 11q and losses at 6q, 9p, and 13q, each present in at least three cell lines. Identification of genetic aberrations by CGH in these cell lines should facilitate the choice of individual cell lines for cloning of genes that are involved in the development and progression of prostate cancer."
9462681	Evidence of independent origin of multiple tumors from patients with prostate cancer.	"BACKGROUND: In men with prostate cancer, the gland usually contains two or more widely separate tumors. A critical issue of prostatic carcinogenesis is whether these multiple tumors are independent in origin. Molecular analysis of microsatellite (i.e., highly repeated, short nucleotide sequences) alterations in the DNA from separate tumors in the same prostate can be used to determine whether or not these separate tumors arise independently. METHODS: Four microsatellite polymorphic markers (D8S133, D8S136, and D8S137, for a putative tumor suppressor gene on chromosome 8p, and D17S855, for the BRCA1 gene on chromosome 17q) were used to examine the pattern of allelic loss in prostate cancer from 19 patients who had two or more distantly separate tumors (i.e., located on contralateral sides or separated by at least half the anterior-posterior diameter of the prostate). Forty distantly separate tumors were microdissected, DNA samples were prepared from formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded wholemount prostate tissue section, and the overall frequencies of loss of heterozygosity at the four loci were determined. RESULTS: The pattern of allelic loss was compatible with independent tumor origin in 15 of 18 informative cases. A random discordant pattern of allelic deletion was observed in distantly separate tumors, whereas the same allele was consistently lost in cells from different regions of the same tumor. For three patients, the results were compatible with either intraglandular dissemination or independent origin of prostate cancer. CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest that multiple tumors in some patients with prostate cancer have independent origin."
9472113	Genetics of Cowden syndrome: through the looking glass of oncology.	"Cowden syndrome (CS) is an autosomal dominant inherited syndrome characterised by hamartoma development in multiple organs and a risk of breast, thyroid and other cancers. The susceptibility gene for this syndrome was mapped to 10q22-23. Subsequently, germline mutations in PTEN, which encodes a dual specificity phosphatase, were found in individuals and families with CS. With the identification of the CS susceptibility gene, DNA-based predictive testing may be offered in theory. Somatic mutations in PTEN have been described in sporadic thyroid tumors, endometrial carcinomas, prostate carcinomas and glioblastoma multiforme. Although initial analyses suggest that the presence of somatic PTEN alterations appear to be associated with more advanced disease in carcinomas of the prostate and brain, this does not appear to be the case in epithelial thyroid tumors."
9551616	Recombinant E1-deleted adenovirus-mediated gene therapy for cancer: efficacy studies with p53 tumor suppressor gene and liver histology in tumor xenograft models.	"Type 5 adenoviral (Ad) vectors have been the ""vector-of-choice"" for preclinical studies on p53 tumor suppressor gene therapy of cancer. Previous studies have examined the in vivo efficacy of p53 Ad when given intratumorally. However published information does little to guide clinicians in the design of intraperitoneal (i.p.) dosing trials for i.p. tumors, e.g., ovarian, or clinical trials using regional organ perfusion, e.g., for lung tumors. Therefore, we examined several parameters with special significance for these routes of administration. Lung metastases from p53mut MDA-MB-231 mammary xenografts were treated with therapeutic levels of intravenous buffer, beta-galactosidase (beta-Gal) Ad, or p53 Ad. Treatment with intravenous p53 Ad significantly reduced the number of metastases per lung and there was a dramatic reduction in the surface area occupied by these tumors as compared to control groups. Two types of i.p. tumor xenografts were used for preclinical modeling of i.p. gene therapy, the p53null SK-OV-3 ovarian and the p53mut DU-145 prostate human cancers. In a study examining the effect of different vehicle volumes on the efficacy of a constant drug dose, all mice treated with p53 Ad had reduced tumor burden compared to controls. Dosing volumes between 0.2 and 1 ml were equally effective and all were more effective than a dosing volume of 0.1 ml. However, reduced efficacy was observed when a volume of 1.5 ml was used. When the effect of dosing frequency on antitumor efficacy was examined, fractionated doses of p53 Ad had somewhat greater efficacy than fewer, bolus injections. One of the significant elements in the emerging toxicology associated with recombinant adenoviruses is the hepatocyte pathology caused by high systemic concentrations of adenovirus. For recombinant Ad used in this study, there was a pronounced dose-dependence for the liver response, with very high, repeated doses causing significant hepatocellular insult. Expression of cytoplasmic beta-Gal protein coincided with areas of greatest damage in mice treated with high doses of beta-Gal Ad. Ultrastructural examination of hepatocyte intranuclear inclusions revealed moderately electron-dense, tightly packed granular material interspersed with more electron-dense nuclear material. Human tumor xenografts, but not mouse tissues, expressed viral hexon protein. In summary, hepatic toxicity caused by high concentrations of recombinant adenovirus was observed in murine cancer models. However, therapeutic levels of p53 Ad could be achieved which had dramatic efficacy without significant pathology."
9554754	A new missense substitution at a mutational hot spot of the androgen receptor in siblings with complete androgen insensitivity syndrome.	"Several mutations have been described in the human androgen receptor gene including constitutional mutations in androgen insensitivity syndrome, somatic mutations in prostate cancer and triplet expansions in Kennedy's disease (Gottlieb et al. 1997). Here we report on two siblings with complete androgen insensitivity and a novel missense mutation, D695V, in their androgen receptor gene. The two XY females are siblings of German descent and presented at the ages of 23 and 19 years, respectively, with typical clinical features of complete androgen insensitivity. We found both siblings to be hemizygous for a new adenine to thymine transversion at the second nucleotide of codon 695 within the fourth exon of the human androgen receptor gene. The resulting missense mutation D695V is located at the amino-terminal border of the ligand-binding domain of the androgen receptor. The aspartic acid residue at this position is highly conserved in the steroid binding domains of other members of the nuclear receptor family and has already been found to be the site of two other missense mutations associated with androgen insensitivity syndrome (Ris Stalpers et al. 1991, Hiort et al. 1996). Three of four reported subjects showed the complete androgen insensitivity phenotype, in accordance with the two siblings in our study. We suggest that the existence of three pathological amino acid substitutions for aspartic acid 695 most likely reflects the essential role of this residue for normal androgen receptor function in male sexual differentiation."
9591631	"A widely expressed transcription factor with multiple DNA sequence specificity, CTCF, is localized at chromosome segment 16q22.1 within one of the smallest regions of overlap for common deletions in breast and prostate cancers."	"The cellular protooncogene MYC encodes a nuclear transcription factor that is involved in regulating important cellular functions, including cell cycle progression, differentiation, and apoptosis. Dysregulated MYC expression appears critical to the development of various types of malignancies, and thus factors involved in regulating MYC expression may also play a key role in the pathogenesis of certain cancers. We have cloned one such MYC regulatory factor, termed CTCF, which is a highly evolutionarily conserved-11-zinc finger transcriptional factor possessing multiple DNA sequence specificity. CTCF binds to a number of important regulatory regions within the 5' noncoding sequence of the human MYC oncogene, and it can regulate its transcription in several experimental systems. CTCF mRNA is expressed in cells of multiple different lineages. Enforced ectopic expression of CTCF inhibits cell growth in culture. Southern blot analyses and fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) with normal human metaphase chromosomes showed that the human CTCF is a single-copy gene situated at chromosome locus 16q22. Cytogenetic studies have pointed out that chromosome abnormalities (deletions) at this locus frequently occur in many different human malignancies, suggesting the presence of one or more tumor suppressor genes in the region. To narrow down their localization, several loss of heterozygosity (LOH) studies of chromosome arm 16q in sporadic breast and prostate cancers have been carried out to define the most recurrent and smallest region(s) of overlap (SRO) for commonly deleted chromosome arm 16q material. For CTCF to be considered as a candidate tumor suppressor gene associated with tumorigenesis, it should localize within one of the SROs at 16q. Fine-mapping of CTCF has enabled us to assign the CTCF gene to about a 2 centiMorgan (cM) interval of 16q22.1 between the somatic cell hybrid breakpoints CY130(D) and CY4, which is between markers D16S186 (16AC16-101) and D16S496 (AFM214zg5). This relatively small region, containing the CTCF gene, overlaps the most frequently observed SROs for common chromosomal deletions found in sporadic breast and prostate tumors. In one of four analyzed paired DNA samples from primary breast cancer patients, we have detected a tumor-specific rearrangement of CTCF exons encoding the 11-zinc-finger domain. Therefore, taken together with other CTCF properties, localization of CTCF to a narrow cancer-associated chromosome region suggests that CTCF is a novel candidate tumor suppressor gene at 16q22.1."
9598803	Inactivation of the PTEN/MMAC1/TEP1 gene in human lung cancers.	"The PTEN/MMAC1/TEP1 gene has been isolated as a tumor suppressor gene that is altered in several types of human tumors including brain, breast, and prostate cancers. In the present study, we report PTEN/MMAC1/TEP1 alterations in human lung cancers. Intragenic homozygous deletions were detected in 6 (40%) of 15 small cell lung carcinoma (SCLC) cell lines and in 2 (8%) of 25 non-small cell lung carcinoma (NSCLC) cell lines. A nonsense mutation and a missense mutation were detected in 2 (8%) NSCLC cell lines. An intragenic homozygous deletion, a 1-bp frameshift mutation, and a nonsense somatic mutation were also detected in three (6%) of 47 surgical specimens. All the lung tumors with PTEN/MMAC1/TEP1 mutations were homozygous for the mutant alleles. These findings suggest that PTEN/MMAC1/TEP1 plays a role as a tumor suppressor gene in the genesis and/or progression of human lung cancer."
9605745	"Mutation, allelotyping, and transcription analyses of the p73 gene in prostatic carcinoma."	"A novel gene, p73, encoding a protein with significant homology to p53, was recently identified at 1p36. To investigate penetrance of p73 in prostatic carcinogenesis, mutation, allelotyping, and transcription analyses of p73 were performed in prostatic carcinoma. No types of mutation causing amino acid substitutions or frameshifts were found in 106 cases examined. Loss of heterozygosity in the gene was found in 2 of 38 cases (5.3%). Various expression levels of p73 alpha variant were observed in tumor compared with those in normal tissue. These data suggest that the p73 gene is not playing an essential role, but expression of p73 may associate with tumor growth in prostatic carcinogenesis."
9607587	A similar pattern of chromosomal alterations in prostate cancers from African-Americans and Caucasian Americans.	"A combination of genetic and epigenetic factors may explain the disproportionate incidence and mortality of prostate cancer among African-American males (AAMs) as compared with Caucasian American males (CAMs). We wished to determine whether primary prostate cancers from AAMs and CAMs harbor different patterns or frequencies of chromosomal alterations. Comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) was performed on clinically localized, untreated primary prostate cancers from 16 AAMs and 16 CAMs. Detailed statistical analysis was used to delineate gains and deletions with high sensitivity and specificity and to compare the frequency and pattern of alterations between the two groups of tumors. The two groups of patients had indistinguishable preoperative serum prostate-specific antigen levels, and the two groups of tumors had similar pathological stages and grades. Chromosomal gains and deletions occurred in regions known to be frequently altered in prostate cancer. Specifically, the most frequent alterations were deletions of regions on chromosomes 13q, 5q, 16q, and 8p and gains of regions on 8q and 5q. When tumors from AAMs and CAMs were compared, the frequencies of alteration (deletion, gain, or no alteration) were similar across 98.9% of the length of the genome. The patterns of alterations of the most frequently altered chromosomes were also similar between tumors from AAMs and CAMs. We concluded that primary prostate cancers from AAMs and CAMs harbor a similar pattern and frequency of chromosomal alterations. These data support the notion that sporadic prostate cancers from AAMs and CAMs develop by similar chromosomal mechanisms. Biological differences, if present, do not occur on the chromosomal level."
9610072	p53 molecule as a prognostic marker in human malignancies.	"The tumor suppressor gene, p53, is the most commonly mutated gene associated with cancer. Mutation of p53 plays a critical role in the multiple stages of carcinogenesis. The functional inactivation of p53 by missense mutations has been described in various cancers and the majority of these mutations occur in exons 5 through 9 of the p53 gene. Mutations leading to the overexpression of p53 have been found to affect the patient survival outcome in several human malignancies. Our experience with more than 200 samples of breast and prostate carcinoma is presented. Our results strongly suggest that the type and location of the p53 mutations within the molecule may affect and dictate the outcome of cancer."
9612688	"Androgen receptor expression, proliferation index and aneuploidy in tissue explant cultures derived prostate carcinoma cells co-cultivated on membranes."	"OBJECTIVES: An improved explant cell culture technique to avoid selection of prostatic adenocarcinoma cells toward diploid cells is described. MATERIAL AND METHODS: 21 prostatic carcinoma specimens which were obtained from 13 primary prostatic adenocarcinomas after radical prostatectomy were cultivated. Ploidy of the cells was monitored by fluorescence in situ DNA hybridization using the centromere-specific DNA probes pUC1.77, p alpha 7t1 and pY3.4. Phenotypic examination of androgen receptor (AR) expression was performed simultaneously with immunostaining by Ki-67 as proliferation marker to identify androgen-independent growing cell clones. RESULTS: Interestingly, a high aneuploidy rate of the cell cultures was found with maintenance of aneuploidy in 18 (86%) of the 21 paraffin-embedded cancer tissue specimens with proved aneuploidy. Significant aneuploid cell populations were retained up to a maximum of ten transfer steps. During serial transfer of tumor pieces the aneusomic fraction slightly decreased as well as the percentage of AR/Ki-67-positive cells. CONCLUSIONS: The presented in vitro model allows to study the proliferation of genetically abnormal cells with respect to hormone dependency in a paracrine situation."
9617316	[Molecular biological aspect]	"Although adenocarcinoma of the prostate is recently becoming one of most common malignancies in Japanese men, it still poses many questions regarding its etiology, pathology, pathogenesis and clinical management. Many reports have been made on oncogene and tumor suppressor gene, however, frequent genetic alterations have not been identified during prostate cancer development. Loss of heterozygosity (LOH) on 8p might be an important event in the early stage of prostatic carcinogenesis, whereas alteration in 17p is now considered a late event. Numerous reports about the androgen receptor (AR) gene have revealed that mutations in the coding region of AR possibly results in an acquired resistance to androgen blockade therapy and anti-androgen withdrawal syndrome. It has been also shown that shorter CAG repeats of AR gene are associated with a higher risk of prostate cancer. Regarding molecular diagnosis, prostate-specific membrane antigen (PSM) appears to be a new molecule with many potentially valuable applications. PSM-reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) is probably more sensitive and specific than PSA-RT-PCR to predict micrometastatic disease. Gene therapy based on the above molecular aspect is currently under investigation but not generally used yet."
9634122	Prolonged prostate-specific antigen response in flutamide withdrawal syndrome despite disease progression.	"Flutamide withdrawal syndrome is characterized by a decrease in prostate-specific antigen (PSA) after flutamide withdrawal in a subset of patients with progressing metastatic carcinoma of the prostate. It is generally hypothesized to be due to a point mutation in the androgen receptor that allows the antiandrogen to function as an agonist, leading to a dramatic and rapid PSA response. We describe a patient with androgen-independent prostate cancer in whom PSA continued to decrease for a period of 15 months after flutamide withdrawal. With continuing fall in PSA, the patient had unequivocal progression of disease seen on bone scan. This case illustrates the potential decoupling of PSA response from disease status in flutamide withdrawal. It also illustrates the need for continued clinical evaluation of patients with metastatic prostate cancer, even in the face of PSA response."
9635571	Beta-catenin mutations in human prostate cancer.	"Beta-catenin plays essential roles in both intercellular adhesion and signal transduction. As a signaling molecule, beta-catenin supplies an activating domain to the T-cell factor/lymphoid enhancer-binding factor family of DNA-binding proteins and activates gene transcription. Posttranslational stabilization of beta-catenin, leading to elevated protein levels and constitutive gene activation, has been proposed as an important step in oncogenesis. Stabilization of beta-catenin can occur through mutation to highly conserved amino acids encoded in exon 3 of the beta-catenin gene (CTNNB1). To determine whether this pathway of malignant transformation is important in prostate cancer, we analyzed 104 prostate cancer tissue specimens, 4 prostate cancer cell lines, and 3 prostate tumor xenografts for activating mutations in exon 3 of CTNNB1. Mutations were detected in 5 of the 104 prostate cancer tissue samples. Four of the five mutations involved serine or threonine residues implicated in the degradation of beta-catenin. A fifth tumor had a mutation at codon 32, changing a highly conserved aspartic acid to a tyrosine. Mutational analysis of multiple regions from several tumor samples showed that the beta-catenin mutations were present focally and therefore may occur during tumor progression."
9649454	Anti-p53 antibodies in patients with Barrett's esophagus or esophageal carcinoma can predate cancer diagnosis.	"BACKGROUND & AIMS: We previously discovered anti-p53 antibodies predating a cancer diagnosis in subjects at increased risk for liver, lung, breast, and prostate cancer. Recently, we reported a significant correlation (P < 0.017) between p53 antibodies and p53 mutations in patients with late-stage esophageal carcinoma. Because others have reported p53 mutations and overexpression of p53 protein in Barrett's esophagus, we studied p53 antibodies in plasma of 88 serially endoscoped patients: 36 with Barrett's metaplasia, 23 with esophageal squamous cell carcinoma, 10 with esophageal adenocarcinoma, and 19 with esophagitis or normal esophagus. METHODS: We used enzyme immunoassay, immunoblotting, and immunoprecipitation assays for p53 antibodies; polymerase chain reaction, denaturant gradient gel electrophoresis, and sequencing for p53 mutations; and immunohistochemistry for p53 protein. RESULTS: p53 antibodies were detected in 4 patients with Barrett's esophagus, including 1 with dysplasia that later progressed to adenocarcinoma, and in 10 cancer patients (P = 0.002) (8 squamous and 2 adenocarcinoma), 2 of whom (1 squamous, 1 adenocarcinoma) had antibodies before cancer was diagnosed. Other patient groups were too small for informative statistical analysis. Six antibody-positive cancer patients had p53 mutations, whereas 2 patients with cancer and 1 with Barrett's esophagus with antibodies had p53 protein overexpressed in esophageal tissues. CONCLUSIONS: Patients with Barrett's esophagus and esophageal cancer can develop p53 antibodies that may predate the clinical diagnosis of malignancy."
9671408	PTEN/MMAC1/TEP1 involvement in primary prostate cancers.	"The PTEN/MMAC1/TEP1 gene, located at 10q23.3, is a tumor suppressor gene responsible for the familial cancer syndromes Cowden disease and Bannayan-Zonana syndrome, and is commonly somatically mutated in several types of cancers. Mutations of the PTEN gene have been found in prostate cancer cell lines and LOH at 10q22-24 in prostate tumors have also been described with a high frequency. To determine the role of this gene in prostate tumorigenesis, we therefore analysed 22 primary tumors for loss of heterozygosity (LOH) within the 10q22-23 region such that tumors hemizygous at those loci may be examined for somatic PTEN mutations. Losses of heterozygosity of at least one locus was found in 12 (55%) of the 22 tumors DNAs. Among these, six tumors exhibited allele loss in the interval between D10S1765 and D10S541 wherein lies the PTEN gene. We searched the entire coding region of PTEN for somatic mutations in these six tumors. One somatic mutation (17%), a 1 bp deletion, was detected in exon 7 of the gene, in one tumor, indicating that somatic mutations of the PTEN gene may occur in primary prostate tumors."
9690547	Low frequency epithelial cells in bone marrow aspirates from prostate carcinoma patients are cytogenetically aberrant.	"BACKGROUND: Low frequency epithelial cells occur in bone marrow aspirates of 25-50% of patients with locally confined prostate carcinoma. It is assumed that bone marrow epithelial cells derive from the primary tumor; however, it has not been established unequivocally that they are tumor cells. Immunofluorescence approaches were used to quantify the frequency of epithelial cells in bone marrow aspirates from prostate carcinoma patients and genotypic analyses were used to determine whether they contained numeric aberrations of chromosomes 1, 7, and 8. METHODS: Epithelial cells in bone marrow aspirates collected after radical prostatectomy were visualized using fluorescence microscopy and fluorophore-linked antibodies against cytokeratin 8,18 (CK) and prostate specific antigen (PSA). Antibodies specific for proliferating nuclear cell antigen (PCNA) were used to evaluate the cycling status of discriminated cells. Copies of chromosomes 1, 7, and 8 in the discriminated epithelial cells were quantified using fluorescence in situ hybridization. RESULTS: CK+ cells were present in bone marrow aspirates from 30 of 66 patients (approximately 45%) at a median frequency of 1.4 CK+ cells/10(5) mononuclear cells. Few CK+ epithelial cells in the bone marrow aspirates coexpressed PSA and none of the CK+ cells expressed PCNA. Approximately 70-75% of the CK+ cells contained 7 and 8 aneusomies. Gains of chromosome 1 occurred in 42% of the CK+ cells. CONCLUSIONS: The majority of CK+ cells in bone marrow aspirates collected after surgery are cytogenetically aberrant, which is consistent with a primary tumor origin. The prevalence and frequency of CK+ cells is independent of tumor stage/grade and androgen treatment."
9721291	"Characterization of the hrpC and hrpRS operons of Pseudomonas syringae pathovars syringae, tomato, and glycinea and analysis of the ability of hrpF, hrpG, hrcC, hrpT, and hrpV mutants to elicit the hypersensitive response and disease in plants."	"The species Pseudomonas syringae encompasses plant pathogens with differing host specificities and corresponding pathovar designations. P. syringae requires the Hrp (type III protein secretion) system, encoded by a 25-kb cluster of hrp and hrc genes, in order to elicit the hypersensitive response (HR) in nonhosts or to be pathogenic in hosts. DNA sequence analysis of the hrpC and hrpRS operons of P. syringae pv. syringae 61 (brown spot of beans), P. syringae pv. glycinea U1 (bacterial blight of soybeans), and P. syringae pv. tomato DC3000 (bacterial speck of tomatos) revealed that the 13 genes comprising the right half of the hrp cluster (including those in the previously sequenced hrpZ operon) are conserved and identically arranged. The hrpC operon is comprised of hrpF, hrpG, hrcC, hrpT, and hrpV. hrcC encodes a putative outer membrane protein that is conserved in all type III secretion systems. The other four genes appear to be characteristic of group I Hrp systems, such as those possessed by P. syringae and Erwinia amylovora. The predicted products of these four genes in P. syringae pv. syringae 61 are HrpF (8 kDa), HrpG (15.4 kDa), HrpT (7.5 kDa), and HrpV (13.4 kDa). HrpT is a putative outer membrane lipoprotein. HrpF, HrpG, and HrpV are all hydrophilic proteins lacking N-terminal signal peptides. The HrpG, HrcC, HrpT, and HrpV proteins of P. syringae pathovars syringae and tomato (the two most divergent pathovars) had at least 76% amino acid identity with each other, whereas the HrpF proteins of these two pathovars had only 36% amino acid identity. The HrpF proteins of P. syringae pathovars syringae and glycinea also showed significant similarity to the HrpA pilin protein of P. syringae pathovar tomato. Functionally nonpolar mutations were introduced into each of the genes in the hrpC operon of P. syringae pv. syringae 61 by insertion of an nptII cartridge lacking a transcription terminator. The mutants were assayed for their ability to elicit the HR in nonhost tobacco leaves or to multiply and cause disease in host bean leaves. Mutations in hrpF, hrcC, and hrpT abolished or greatly reduced the ability of P. syringae pv. syringae 61 to elicit the HR in tobacco. The hrpG mutant had only weakly reduced HR activity, and the activity of the hrpV mutant was indistinguishable from that of the wild type. Each of the mutations could be complemented, but surprisingly, the hrpV subclone caused a reduction in the HR elicitation ability of the DeltahrpV::nptII mutant. The hrpF and hrcC mutants caused no disease in beans, whereas the hrpG, hrpT, and hrpV mutants had reduced virulence. Similarly, the hrcC mutant grew little in beans, whereas the other mutants grew to intermediate levels in comparison with the wild type. These results indicate that HrpC and HrpF have essential functions in the Hrp system, that HrpG and HrpT contribute quantitatively but are not essential, and that HrpV is a candidate negative regulator of the Hrp system."
9721292	Negative regulation of hrp genes in Pseudomonas syringae by HrpV.	"Mutations in the five hrp and hrc genes in the hrpC operon of the phytopathogen Pseudomonas syringae pv. syringae 61 have different effects on bacterial interactions with host and nonhost plants. The hrcC gene within the hrpC operon encodes an outer membrane component of the Hrp secretion system that is conserved in all type III protein secretion systems and is required for most pathogenic phenotypes and for secretion of the HrpZ harpin to the bacterial milieu. The other four genes (in order), hrpF, hrpG, (hrcC), hrpT, and hrpV, appear to be unique to the group I hrp clusters found in certain phytopathogens (e.g., P. syringae and Erwinia amylovora) and are less well understood. We initiated an examination of their role in Hrp regulation and secretion by determining the effects of functionally nonpolar nptII cartridge insertions in each gene on the production and secretion of HrpZ, as determined by immunoblot analysis of cell fractions. P. syringae pv. syringae 61 hrpF, hrpG, and hrpT mutants were unable to secrete HrpZ, whereas the hrpV mutant overproduced and secreted the protein. This suggested that HrpV is a negative regulator of HrpZ production. Further immunoblot assays showed that the hrpV mutant produced higher levels of proteins encoded by all three of the major hrp operons tested-HrcJ (hrpZ operon), HrcC (hrpC operon), and HrcQB (hrpU operon)-and that constitutive expression of hrpV in trans abolished the production of each of these proteins. To determine the hierarchy of HrpV regulation in the P. syringae pv. syringae 61 positive regulatory cascade, which is composed of HrpRS (proteins homologous with sigma54-dependent promoter-enhancer-binding proteins) and HrpL (alternate sigma factor), we tested the ability of constitutively expressed hrpV to repress the activation of HrcJ production that normally accompanies constitutive expression of hrpL or hrpRS. No repression was observed, indicating that HrpV acts upstream of HrpRS in the cascade. The effect of HrpV levels on transcription of the hrpZ operon was determined by monitoring the levels of beta-glucuronidase produced by a hrpA'::uidA transcriptional fusion plasmid in different P. syringae pv. syringae 61 strains. The hrpV mutant produced higher levels of beta-glucuronidase than the wild type, a hrcU (type III secretion) mutant produced the same level as the wild type, and the strain constitutively expressing hrpV in trans produced low levels equivalent to that of a hrpS mutant. These results suggest that HrpF, HrpG, and HrpT are all components of the type III protein secretion system whereas HrpV is a negative regulator of transcription of the Hrp regulon."
9736693	Delta5-androstenediol is a natural hormone with androgenic activity in human prostate cancer cells.	"It is known that androst-5-ene-3beta,17beta-diol (Adiol), a precursor of testosterone (T), can activate estrogen target genes. The androgenic activity of Adiol itself, however, is poorly understood. Using a transient transfection assay, we here demonstrate in human prostate cancer cells that Adiol can activate androgen receptor (AR) target genes in the presence of AR, and that AR coactivator ARA70 can further enhance this Adiol-induced AR transcriptional activity. In contrast to this finding, an active metabolite of dehydroepiandrosterone, 7-oxo-dehydroepiandrosterone, does not activate AR target gene in the absence or presence of ARA70. Thin layer chromatography analysis reveals that T, dihydrotestosterone, and 17beta-estradiol are undetectable in human prostate cancer DU145 cells after treatment with Adiol. Additionally, a proteolysis assay shows that a distinct ligand-receptor conformational difference exists between T-AR and Adiol-AR. Together, the above findings and the fact that T, but not Adiol, can induce transcriptional activity in a mutant AR (mtAR708), suggest that, without being metabolized into T, Adiol itself may represent a natural hormone with androgenic activity in human prostate cancer cells. Because two potent antiandrogens, hydroxyflutamide (Eulexin), and bicalutamide (casodex), that are widely used for the treatment of prostate cancer, fail to block Adiol-mediated induction of AR transcriptional activity in prostate cancer cells, the effectiveness of so-called ""total androgen blockage,"" a standard treatment for prostate cancer, may need to be reevaluated."
9771481	Longitudinal evaluation of cytogenetic aberrations in prostatic cancer: tumours that recur in time display an intermediate genetic status between non-persistent and metastatic tumours.	"Only limited data are available on chromosomes specifically involved in prostatic tumour progression. This study has evaluated the cytogenetic status of primary prostatic carcinomas, local tumour recurrences, and distant metastases, representing different time points in prostatic tumour progression. Interphase in situ hybridization (ISH) was applied with a set of (peri) centromeric DNA probes, specific for chromosomes 1, 7, 8 and Y, to routinely processed tissue sections of 73 tumour specimens from 32 patients. Longitudinal evaluation was possible in 11 cases with local recurrence and nine cases with distant metastases. The remaining 12 patients showed no evidence of local recurrence or distant metastasis after radical prostatectomy on follow-up (mean 60.5 months) and served as a reference. Numerical aberrations of at least one chromosome were found in 27 per cent of the local recurrences and 56 per cent of the distant metastases. In decreasing order of frequency, +8, +7, and -Y were observed in the recurrences and +8, +7, -Y, and +1 in the distant metastases. Evaluation of the corresponding primary tumour tissue of the recurrence group showed numerical aberrations in 45 per cent of cases. The aberrations found were, in decreasing order of frequency, -Y, +7, and +8. In the concomitant primary tumour tissue of the distant metastasis group, numerical aberrations were detected in 67 per cent of cases. The aberrations most frequently encountered were +8, -Y, followed by +7. In four cases, a concordance was found between the primary tumour and its recurrence or distant metastasis. Discrepancies might have been caused by cytogenetic heterogeneity. Comparison of the primary tumour tissue of the reference, the recurrence, and the distant metastasis groups showed a significant increase for the percentage of cases with numerical aberrations (Ptrend = 0.02). Likewise, a trend was seen for gain of chromosome 7 and/or 8 (Ptrend < 0.05). The number of DNA aneuploid tumours also increased in these different groups (Ptrend = 0.03). These data suggest that cancers which recur in time display an intermediate position between tumours of disease-free patients and metastatic cancers."
9788603	Human chromosome 16 suppresses metastasis but not tumorigenesis in rat prostatic tumor cells.	"Genomic aberrations at the chromosome 16q arm are one of the most consistent abnormalities observed by loss of heterozygosity and comparative genomic hybridization analyses in human prostate cancer, suggesting that there are tumor suppressor or metastasis suppressor genes encoded by this chromosomal region. To functionally identify such suppressor genes, we have conducted microcell-mediated chromosome transfer to introduce human chromosome 16 into the highly metastatic Dunning rat prostatic cancer cell line, AT6.1. The metastatic ability of the resultant microcell hybrid clones was then tested in a standard spontaneous metastasis assay using SCID mice. When the microcell-mediated chromosome transfer hybrid cells containing whole human chromosome 16 were injected, the number of metastatic lesions in the lung was significantly reduced as much as 99% on average. Therefore, chromosome 16 has a strong activity to suppress the metastatic ability of AT6.1 cells while it did not affect the tumorigenesis and tumor growth rate. A PCR analysis of various microcell hybrid clones with sequence-tagged site markers indicates that the metastasis suppressor activity is located in the q24.2 region of chromosome 16. Our results are consistent with the previous finding that the region of human chromosome 16q has frequent loss of heterozygosity in prostate cancer patients and suggest that there is a metastasis suppressor gene in this region that may play an important role in the progression of prostate cancer."
9801158	"Genes encoding human caveolin-1 and -2 are co-localized to the D7S522 locus (7q31.1), a known fragile site (FRA7G) that is frequently deleted in human cancers."	"The (CA)n microsatellite repeat marker D7S522 is located on human chromosome 7q31.1 and is frequently deleted in a variety of human cancers, including squamous cell carcinomas of the head and neck, prostate cancers, renal cell carcinomas, ovarian adenocarcinomas, colon carcinomas, and breast cancers. In addition, D7S522 spans FRA7G, a known common fragile site on human chromosome 7. Based on these studies, it has been proposed that an as yet unidentified tumor suppressor gene (or genes) is contained within or located in close proximity to this locus. However, the identity of the candidate tumor suppressor gene at the D7S522 locus remains unknown. Here, we show that the human genes encoding caveolins 1 and 2 are contained within the same human genomic BAC clones and co-localize to the q31.1-q31.2 region of human chromosome 7, as seen by FISH analysis. In addition, we determined the intron-exon boundaries of the human caveolin-1 and -2 genes. The human caveolin-1 gene contains three exons, while the human caveolin-2 gene contains two exons. Interestingly, the boundary of the last exon of the human caveolin-1 and caveolin-2 genes are analogous, suggesting that they arose through gene duplication at this locus. (CA)n microsatellite repeat marker analysis of these caveolin genomic clones indicates they contain the marker D7S522 (located at 7q31.1), but not other microsatellite repeat markers tested. The close proximity of caveolins 1 and 2 to the D7S522 locus was independently confirmed by using a panel of MIT/Whitehead human STS markers that are known to map in the neighborhood of the D7S522 locus. As it has been previously shown that caveolin 1 possesses transformation suppressor activity (Koleske, A.J., Baltimore, D. and M.P. Lisanti (1995) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 92, 1381-1385; Engelman, J.A. et al. (1997) J. Biol. Chem. 272, 16374-16381), we propose that the caveolin-1 gene may represent the candidate tumor suppressor gene at the D7S522 locus on human chromosome 7q31.1."
9816332	Trisomy 7 by dual-color fluorescence in situ hybridization: a potential biological marker for prostate cancer progression.	"Smear preparations from fine-needle aspirates of 30 prostatic carcinomas obtained from radical prostatectomy specimens were examined by a dual-color fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) method for the presence of chromosome 7 trisomy (chromosome 9 was used as a control). The frequency of cells with trisomy 7 was determined in tumor cells and normal prostatic epithelial cells in each specimen. Comparison between the tumor and normal cells from the same patients showed that within all stages, the frequency of trisomy 7/disomy 9 cells in the tumor cells was significantly higher than that observed in the normal cells (P < 0.0001). Furthermore, the mean frequency of cells with trisomy 7/disomy 9 in advanced stages was significantly elevated over the mean frequency observed in organ-confined tumors (P = 0.02). These results are consistent with our previous data on paraffin-embedded prostate tissue sections using single-color FISH procedures. However, the method used in the present study enhances the accuracy of distinguishing trisomic 7 cells from potentially triploid (trisomy 7/trisomy 9) cells. Furthermore, the use of fine-needle aspirates rather than paraffin sections provides an easy method to examine whole nuclei. Our study also suggests that FISH provides a better measure of genetic instability (e.g., aneuploidy) in prostate tumors than flow cytometry."
9852672	Infrequent genetic alterations of the PTEN gene in Japanese patients with sporadic prostate cancer.	"Prostate cancer is a major cause of cancer death among elderly men in America, Europe, and Japan. However, the molecular mechanism of carcinogenesis is not yet well characterized. Frequent loss of heterozygosity (LOH) on chromosome 10q was reported in prostate cancer, and a candidate tumor suppressor gene, PTEN, was isolated on chromosome band 10q23.3. To investigate the genetic alterations of PTEN, we examined 45 primary prostate cancer specimens. LOH at the PTEN locus was observed in two (11.1%) of 18 tumors. However, no mutations were observed in any of the primary prostate cancers. These data suggest that mutation of the PTEN gene does not play a major role in prostate carcinogenesis of Japanese patients."
9864434	Analysis of the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p27Kip1 in muscle invasive bladder cancer.	"It has been suggested that a deregulated cell cycle control contributes to the development of human malignancies due to the loss of critical antiproliferative mechanisms. The cell cycle is controlled at two checkpoints, one at the G1-S and another at the G2-M transition. Several genes including the structurally related p21WAF/CIP1 gene, the downstream mediator of the p53 tumor suppressor gene, and the p27Kip1 gene have been identified as inducers of cell cycle arrest at the G1 checkpoint when substantial DNA damage has occurred to avoid further replication of the altered genome. Recently, a heat stable 27 kDa protein, the transcript of the p27Kip1 gene, has been identified and was suggested to substantially participate in cell cycle control at the G1 checkpoint. Previous investigations have correlated decreased expression of the p27Kip1 protein with an increased biological aggressiveness of breast and small cell lung cancer. However, the molecular-genetic analysis of a variety of human malignancies including prostate cancer failed to identify any alteration at the p27Kip1 gene locus, therefore suggesting a loss of p27Kip1 protein expression to result from post-transcriptional/post-translational events or from so far unknown regulatory mechanisms. So far, bladder cancer specimens have neither been investigated for p27Kip1 alterations on the DNA level, nor has the result of molecular genetic analysis been correlated with an immunohistochemically detected expression of the gene product, the p27Kip1 protein. The present study is the first to describe p27Kip1 gene alterations on the DNA level in 3 of 42 muscle invasive bladder cancer specimens. In contrast, loss of p27Kip1 protein expression was observed in 14 of 42 (33%) tumors. According to the previously reported observation in a variety of human malignancies, in bladder cancer loss of p27Kip1 protein expression seems to result from post-transcriptional or post-translational events."
9885978	Identification of a homozygous deletion at 8p12-21 in a human prostate cancer xenograft.	"One of the most frequent genetic abnormalities in prostate cancer is loss of the complete or part of the short arm of chromosome 8, indicating the localization of one or more tumor suppressor genes on this chromosomal arm. Using allelotyping, a frequently deleted region in prostate cancer in a genetic interval of approximately 17 cM between sequence tagged sites D8S87 and D8S133 at chromosome arm 8p12-21 was previously detected. A detailed physical map of this region is now available. Using known and novel polymorphic and nonpolymorphic sequence tagged sites in this interval, a search for homozygous deletions in DNAs from 14 prostate cancer-derived cell lines and xenografts was carried out. In DNA from xenograft PC133, the presence of a small homozygously deleted region of 730-1,320 kb was unambiguously established. At one site, the deletion disrupts the Werner syndrome gene. Data from allelotyping were confirmed and extended by fluorescence in situ hybridization analysis of PC133 chromosome spreads using centromere, YAC, and PAC chromosome 8 probes."
9933059	"Aneuploidy index in blood: a potential marker for early onset, androgen response, and metastasis in human prostate cancer."	"OBJECTIVES: To investigate whether the frequency of chromosome abnormalities in peripheral blood lymphocytes defined as the aneuploidy index in blood (AnIB) can be used as a clinical marker of early age onset, androgen response, and metastasis in human prostate cancer. METHODS: Peripheral blood samples were collected from 80 patients with prostate cancer, and chromosome preparations were made from 72-hour cultures after mitotic block. The AnIB of 59 informative cases was compared with several parameters, including age at disease onset, Gleason grade of tumor, clinical stage of tumor, metastasis, and prostate-specific antigen (PSA) level. RESULTS: Patients with AnIB levels greater than 3 had a significantly higher incidence of metastasis (P = 0.022), androgen-independent disease (P = 0.002), and early age at disease onset (age at diagnosis less than 65 years) (P = 0.002) compared with the patients with lower AnIB (less than 3) levels. In addition, patients with AnIB levels greater than 5 had higher PSA levels (greater than 20 ng/mL) (P = 0.029) than patients with AnIB levels less than 5. CONCLUSIONS: Chromosome abnormalities can be detected in the peripheral lymphocytes of patients with prostate cancer, and AnIB can be used as an early diagnostic and predictive marker for prostate cancer metastasis and androgen-independent disease."
9973923	Loss of heterozygosity of the TP53 tumor suppressor gene and detection of point mutations by the non-isotopic RNAse cleavage assay in prostate cancer.	"Mutation within the TP53 tumor suppressor gene is a frequent occurrence in human cancers, resulting in a poor prognosis, response to therapy, and overall survival time. Mutations have been primarily detected in advanced prostate cancer; however, the involvement of the gene through loss of heterozygosity (LOH) in primary prostate cancers has not been investigated due to lack of identifiable polymorphisms within this gene. Using the nonisotopic RNAse cleavage assay (NIRCA), we screened for point mutations and identified an ApaI restriction site polymorphism located in intron 7 within the TP53 gene. This polymorphism allowed us to detect LOH in informative samples in a population of patients that underwent prostate biopsies and a population that underwent radical prostatectomies. Within the combined study population, 31 of 80 patients (38.75%) were informative for the polymorphism. Loss of heterozygosity was detected in 10 of the 31 samples (32.3%). Point mutations were identified in two samples. The identification of LOH in these patients suggests that the TP53 tumor suppressor gene may play a more active role in prostate cancer than was previously believed."
9988226	BRCA1 gene mutation and loss of heterozygosity on chromosome 17q21 in primary prostate cancer.	"The tumor suppressor gene BRCA1 on chromosome 17q21 has been characterized and shown to be mutated in patients with familial breast and ovarian cancer. Several studies examined the relatives of women with breast cancer and noted an association with ovarian and prostate cancer. This study investigated 24 human prostate cancer specimens for BRCA1 gene mutations and loss of heterozygosity (LOH) on chromosome 17q21 assessed by the polymerase chain reaction. LOH was identified using 7 highly polymorphic tandem repeat markers on chromosome 17q21, in addition to an analysis of the whole coding region of the BRCA1 gene. Four of the 24 prostate cancer specimens showed LOH at one or more loci, all of which were histologically poorly differentiated (4 of 11) and stage D (4 of 15). One of the 24 cases showed a germ-line mutation of the BRCA1 gene, and a sister of this patient died of ovarian cancer. It appears that the BRCA1 gene is not frequently involved in the development of primary prostate cancer."
8038153	Structural characteristics for biological activity of heat-stable enterotoxin produced by enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli: X-ray crystallography of weakly toxic and nontoxic analogs. 	"Heat-stable enterotoxin (ST) produced by a pathogenic strain of Escherichia coli  exerts its function by binding to a membrane-bound guanylyl cyclase on intestinal epithelial cell membranes, which in turn catalyzes the production of cyclic GMP as a second messenger in the cells. To elucidate the structural requirements for  the biological activities of ST, we synthesized [Mpr5,Gly13]STp(5-17) and [Mpr5,Leu13]STp(5-17), which are weakly toxic and nontoxic analogs of STp, in which the toxic domain consists of the sequence from Cys at position 5 to Cys at  position 17. In these analogs, Cys at position 5 is replaced by Mpr (beta-mercaptopropionic acid) and Ala at position 13 by Gly and Leu, respectively. We examined these analogs by X-ray diffraction analysis using direct methods and refined the structures to crystallographic R factors of 7.3% and 6.6% using 5492 and 5122 data, respectively, observed > 3 sigma (Fo) with a resolution of 0.89 A. These peptides have a right-handed spiral structure consisting of three structural segments: an N-terminal 3(10) helix, a central type I beta-turn, and a C-terminal type II beta-turn. These structures show minor differences from that of [Mpr5]STp(5-17), the fully toxic analog of heat-stable enterotoxin [Ozaki et al. (1991) J. Biol. Chem. 266, 5934-5941], suggesting that  the decrease and loss of the biological activities of [Mpr5,Gly13]STp(5-17) and [Mpr5,Leu13]STp(5-17), respectively, are not caused by structural changes but are associated with the direct interaction of Ala13 with the receptor protein. Careful comparison of these structures in crystalline states revealed that ST has the following structural characteristics: (i) inherent flexibility at the junctions of the three segments and in the central segment, which includes the putative receptor-binding residues, Ala13, (ii) a specific hydrophobic character  around the central segment, and (iii) an unexpected C-terminal folding similar to those of functionally unrelated peptides that are known to be ionophores. "
